Cobalt  doped  zinc  oxide  (Zn1-xCoxO;  x =  0,  0.05,  0.10,  0.15)  samples  were  synthesized  using  co-
precipitation  method.  The  Co  doped  ZnO  nanoparticles  showed  the maximum  solubility  limit. The  XRD
patterns confirm  the hexagonal  type  wurtzite  structure  without  secondary  phase  in  Co  substituted  ZnO
samples.  The  particle  size  was  studied  using  transmission  electron  microscope  (TEM)  and  grain  size  esti-
mated  using  scanning  electron  microscope  (SEM).  We  report  the  study of temperature  dependence  of
conductivity  on  ZnO  and  Co doped  ZnO  nanoparticles.  It is found  that at a higher  temperature  range
(above  470  K)  thermally  activated  type of conduction  is  in  dominance  with  the  lower  temperature  range
of conduction  in  which  donor  carrier hopping  mechanism  is  dominated.  DC conductivity  result  shows  the
reduction  nature  for cobalt  doped  ZnO.  The  obtained  results  are  discussed  on basis  of  potential  barrier,pherical structure
lectrical conductivity
donor  concentration,  point  defects  and  adsorption–desorption  of  oxygen.  Cobalt  substitution  increases
resistivity,  reduces  grain  growth,  lower  particle  size  and  increase  in  activation  energy. Detailed  map-
ping  of  two  regions  of electrical  conductivity  is  done  to  understand  the  activation  energy  mechanisms
prevailing  in  cobalt  doped  ZnO.
Introduction
Zinc oxide (ZnO) is a II–VI group semiconductor has a wurtzite
rystal structure, with a direct and wide bandgap of 3.37 eV, a large
xciton binding energy (60 meV) and high optical gain at room tem-
erature [1–3]. Numerous applications of wurtzite ZnO comprises
f field-effect transistor [4], optical device [5], dye-sensitized solar
ell [6], solid-state gas sensor [7,8]. The strong n-type conductiv-
ty is exhibited by zinc oxide varistor (ZnO) with the electrons to
ove in the conduction band as charge carriers. Primary depen-
ence of electrical properties of ZnO is based on the composition
nd on microstructure characteristics such as grain size, density
nd morphology. The study of effect of dopants on physical and
lectrical properties of ZnO are related to applications in electronic
omponents such as piezoelectric transducers and varistor.Most of the ZnO nanomaterials have been fabricated by conven-
ional high temperature solid state mechanisms which is energy
onsuming and unfavorable to control the particle properties [9].
ZnO nanoparticles can be synthesized by simple solution based
methods on a large scale such as chemical precipitation, sol–gel
synthesis, and solvothermal/hydrothermal reaction [10]. We syn-
thesized ZnO nano powders using precipitation method at a
sintering temperature of 400 ◦C. This fabrication method has been
successfully employed in our work to prepare nanoscale particles
being cost-effective and controlled which desires low temperatures
for processing and a high degree of solubility can be acquired.
Among many research dopants in zinc oxide, cobalt doped zinc
oxide shows potential in various applications [11,12]. According
to reference studies [13], doping Cobalt in ZnO creates more zinc
vacancies. Thus among diluted magnetic semiconductors (DMS),
Cobalt doped ZnO is considered as a potential candidate among the
TM because of its abundant electron states, large solubility in the
ZnO matrix and also cobalt has a similar ionic radius (0.58 Å) to that
of Zn (0.60 Å) [14]. Further different complex morphologies such
as flowers, rods, sheets etc require too many control parameters
which limit the application of the nanostructures.
3+The presence of secondary phases like Co ions which may
coexist with Co2+ ions in Co doped ZnO nanoparticles, are expected
to have lattice defects [15]. Kumar and Khare, Roy et al. [16,17]
and Yan et al. [18] reported increase in resistivity of Co2+ doped
on and hosting by Elsevier B.V. Godavarti et al. / Journal of Asi
nO samples, can be attributed to the shallow acceptor nature of
hese impurities. Birajdar et al. [19] and Kulandaisamy et al. [20]
eported an increase in resistivity due to cobalt defect scattering
entre in the ZnO lattice. Substitution of any dopant can expect
hanges in lattice parameter (a,c) and volume (V) showing initial
roof of doping effects. Creating defects or doping in zinc oxide to
enerate multi-valence nature in the system to tailor the level or
ccupancy of the fermi energy level further affects the conductivity
ature [21]. Doping any element in zinc oxide could produce dis-
ortions, results variations in optical band gap [22]. Considering the
urtein-Moss effect, the band gap value increases with the number
f carrier concentration in conduction band. This could be also ver-
fied using conductivity nature of the samples. Therefore, from the
urrent study, we attempt to dope cobalt in Zinc oxide by varying
eight percentages and to study the conductivity properties.
. Experimental
.1. Preparation of the pure and Co doped ZnO nanoparticles
The following high purity chemicals such as zinc acetate
ehydrate (Zn (CH3COO)2·2H2O), cobalt acetate tetrahydrate
Co (CH3COO)2·4H2O), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), ethanol and
ethanol (99.998%) were used as the precursors without further
urification. For the preparation of pure ZnO nanoparticles (NPs),
pecific amounts of zinc acetate and NaOH are dissolved in 50 ml
ethanol which is added drop wise and then stirred with heating
t 325 K for 2 h. The precipitate is separated from the solution by
ltration, washed several times with distilled water and ethanol
hen dried in air at 400 K to obtain ZnO nanocrystals. The sam-
les obtained were annealed at 673 K for 8 h. For the synthesis
obalt doped ZnO, zinc acetate dehydrate and cobalt acetate dehy-
rate were dissolved in methanol (100 ml)  and other containing of
aOH in methanol (100 ml)  were prepared and added by constant
agnetic stirring while heating at 325 K for 2 h. Precipitate is then
eparated from the solution by filtration, washed several times with
istilled water and ethanol then dried in air at 400 K to obtain Co
oped ZnO nanoparticles and annealing at 673 K for 8 h.
.2. Characterization of samples
For electrical conductivity measurements, the powder samples
ere pressed uniaxially into a pellet of thickness 4–5 mm and of
iameter 10 mm by applying pressure of 120 Mpa  for 3 min. Pellets
ere sintered at 573 K for 3 h for thermal stabilization. Fine quality
ilver paint was applied on both sides of the pellets for good elec-
rical contacts. The DC electrical conductivity measurements were
arried by two probe method in the temperature range 300–650 K.
he samples were analyzed by the following characterization stud-
es. The samples were analyzed by the following characterization
tudies done using x-Ray powder diffraction (XRD) (XPERT-PRO
Model: PW-3710) operated at 45 kV and 40 mA  with a Cu-K radia-
ion source of wavelength 1.5406 ´̊A), scanning electron microscope
SEM) (Model: JSM6100), transmission electron microscope (TEM:
itachi-Model: H-7500) and DC electrical conductivity measure-
ents using KEITHLEY source meter (model 2400).
.3. Different relations used for measurement of properties
The lattice constants of pure and Co doped ZnO nanocrystals
ere determined using following formula
in2 = 2
4a2
[
4
3
(h2 + hk + k2) + a2l2
c2
]
(1)Fig. 1. X-ray diffraction patterns of Zn1-xCoxO nanoparticles.
where ‘’ is the angle of diffraction, ‘’ is wavelength, ‘a’ & ‘c’ are lat-
tice constants and h, k and l are miller indices. Considering the first
order approximation (n = 1) for the (100) plane, the lattice constant
‘a’ is obtained through the relation
a = √
3 sin 
(2)
Lattice constant ‘c’ is derived for the plane (002) by the relation
c = 
sin 
(3)
The volume of unit cell can be calculated using equation,
V = 0.866 × a2 × c (4)
The parameter ‘u’ can be calculated by the formula doping-
induced effect of bond length ZnO is analyzed.
u = a2
3c2
+ 0.25 (5)
Average crystallite sizes were estimated using Debye–Scherrer’s
equation
D = K
 ̌ cos 
(6)
Strain induced broadening (ε) is given by the Wilson formula:
ε = ˇhkl
4 tan 
(7)
where ‘ε’ is the root mean square value of the micro strain. The
readings were recorded during slow cooling after heating cycle and
the electrical conductivity () was calculated by the formula:
 =
(
I × t
V × A
)
(8)
where ‘V’ is the applied voltage, ‘I’ is the measured current; ‘A’ is
the area of the pellet and ‘t’ the thickness of the pellet.
3. Results and discussions
3.1. X-ray diffraction study
Fig. 1 shows x-ray diffraction patterns (XRD) of pure and Co
doped ZnO nanoparticles. The XRD peaks are located at angle
(2) corresponds to (100), (002), (101), (102), (110), (103), (112),
(201) and (004) planes attributed to ZnO. The XRD peaks show the
hexagonal (wurtzite) crystal structure of all prepared samples. In
reported literatures the spinel Co3O4 peaks are observed as a sec-
ondary phase even for the lowest dopant concentration x = 0.1 at
sufficiently high calcination temperature of 600 ◦C [23,24]. Fig. 1
confirms no extra or any impurity phases evident in Co doped ZnO
Fig. 2. Average crystallite size and strain Vs Co content of Zn1-xCoxO nanoparticles.
amples, indicates that the prepared samples are single in phase
hereby clearly indicating that cobalt has been incorporated in to
he lattice as a substitutional atom. Lowering intensity and increase
n full width half maxima (FWHM) in the results of XRD is also
bserved due to the effect of cobalt incorporation in zinc oxide.
 small shift is also observed in the peaks for the cobalt doped
nO samples due to replacement of cobalt Co2+ with Zn2+ evident
s decrease of intensity peak (101) as shown in Fig. 1. Evidence of
eak reduction in terms of peak intensity can influence particle size
r lattice strain. Fig. 2 shows the variation for average crystallite
ize and strain for cobalt concentration for Zn1-xCoxO nanoparti-
les. The changes produced in strain are sufficient to produce the
ormation of clusters or precipitation which could further evident
sing transmission electron microscope (TEM) and scanning elec-
ron microscope (SEM).No secondary phases or existence of Co3+ ions in our samples is
vident in XRD studies, suggests that the Co2+ ions are responsible
or the deformation of the lattice structure when they are substi-
uted for Zn2+ ions in ZnO. Deformation variation is observed on
Fig. 3. TEM image of (a) ZnO (b) Zn0.9
Fig. 4. SEM image of (a) ZnOamic Societies 5 (2017) 391–396 393
basis of increase in lattice parameters (a,c) and volume as evident
in Table 1. Smaller variation observed is attributed to mismatch
in radius of cobalt and zinc oxide, in octahedral environment. The
lattice parameters is expected to increase due to cobalt doing as
assuming tetrahedral environment with high spin state for Co(2+)
(0.745 Å) and low spin state for Co(2+) (0.65 Å) are smaller than
Zn(2+)(0.60Å) as reported elsewhere [25]. The increase in volume
resulted a change in oxygen parameter, which increases with
increase in cobalt. These increases in defect density which can
cause a change in the lattice parameters of ZnO, also results in the
non-linear behavior of electrical conductivity.
3.2. Morphological study
3.2.1. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) study
Fig. 3 reveals the homogeneous distribution of Co2+ particles in
the ZnO lattice along with particle sizes. Fig. 3(a) shows the ZnO
nanoparticles are hexagonal in shape with average particles size
around 30 nm.  Fig. 3(b) and (c) shows the TEM images for Co–ZnO
samples, suggests that the particles are spherical in shape with
average particles size is around ∼20 nm and these results correlate
with our XRD results. Average particle size of Co–ZnO nanoparticles
reduces when compared of pure ZnO, showing small grain growth
of doped samples.
3.2.2. Scanning electron microscope(SEM) study
Fig. 4 shows scanning electron microscope (SEM) images for
pure and Co–ZnO nanoparticles. Surface morphology shows uni-
form evenly distributed grains with hexagonal structure in the
samples, as shown in Fig. 4. SEM micrographs also reveal that cobalt
doped ZnO nanoparticles decreases in average grain size which can
also evident from our XRD measurements and TEM. This decrease
in average grain size with increasing doping concentration was also
reported by Vijayaprasath et al. [26] in Co-doped Ni/ZnO nanopar-
ticles.
5Co0.05O and (c) Zn0.85Co0.15O.
 and (b) Zn0.95Co0.05O.
394 U. Godavarti et al. / Journal of Asian Ceramic Societies 5 (2017) 391–396
Table 1
Structural parameters, average crystallite size and strain of Zn1-xCoxO nanoparticles.
Samples (% Co) Lattice parameters (Å) Volume (Å) c/a ratio u (distortion parameter) Bond length (Å)
a c
Fig. 5. Variation of conductivity,  (S/m) with dopant concentration.
.3. Electrical conductivity
Decrease in conductivity with increase in doping concentration
f cobalt in ZnO is shown in Fig. 5. This is consistent with the
iterature and is also evident from SEM analysis [27,28] which is
ttributed to the increased defect scattering due to the addition
f Co2+ ions. Free electrons from the donor levels are trapped by
he divalent ions, results in the decrease in the n-type donor car-
ier concentration and increase in resistivity. The small amount
f cobalt within soluble limit depresses the carrier concentration
aking the ZnO higher resistive [29]. Critical nature of resistivity
vident in the magnetic based semiconductors was attributed to
istribution of carriers through exchange interaction [30].
Fig. 6 shows the observed values of conductivity which rises
lowly with increase of temperature above 470 K for increase in
obalt doping concentration. At a temperature higher than 450 K, as
hown in Fig. 6(a) ln(conductivity) is plotted against the inverse of
emperature. Similarly at a temperature lower than 450 K. Fig. 6(b)
how ln(conductivity) plotted against the inverse of temperature
Fig. 6. Variation of electrical conductivity with temperature in
elucidating a non-linear behavior compatible with the ionic radius
of Co2+ ions to that of Zn2+ ions. Substitution of Co2+ ions in Zn2+
lattice site is expected to create certain oxygen vacancies or zinc
interstitials. These vacancies can perform as donors as well as
deform the lattice structure to maintain the charge neutrality. The
variation in conductivity is also dependent on thermal energy and
below Curie temperatures. Conductivity is largely dependent on
charge carrier mobility which can be observed in Fig. 6(a) and (b).
To understand the conductivity mechanism in cobalt doped zinc
oxide, the conductivity curve shown is divided in to two  different
regions (I, II). The linear region I (high temperature region) refers to
linear conduction mechanism and region II is transition region (low
temperature region). For these regions, the electrical conductivity
of Zn(1-x)CoxO can be analyzed by the Arrhenius equation which
relates the electrical conductivity and the temperature is given by
 = 0 exp
(−Ea
kBT
)
(9)
where 0 is the pre-exponential factor and E is the activation energy
for the conductivity. Ea values for region II were respectively cal-
culated from the linear portions of Fig. 6(a) and the Ea values of
region I are calculated from the slope of the Arrhenius plot as shown
in Fig. 6(b). Since, there are two slopes two conduction mecha-
nisms are possible, observed two-stage temperature dependence
of conductance () may  be represented as:
 = L exp
(−EaL
kBT
)
+ H exp
(−EaH
kBT
)
(10)
In above equation,  L and  H are pre-exponential factors, EaL
and EaH are the activation energy for low and high temperature
conductance stages respectively. As shown in Fig. 7 Arrhenius plots
of Zn1-xCoxO were used to calculate activation energies and are
given in Table 2 for different values Ea in region I (in high tempera-
ture range 473–508 K) and Ea in region II (in low temperature range
363–473 K).The measured activation energies for two  regions suggest the
operating mechanisms of trapped or scattering ions. As the dop-
ing concentration increases, the activation energy is raised which
would account for the raise in atomic defects and are electrically
 two different regions (a) 473–508 K and (b) 360–460 K.
U. Godavarti et al. / Journal of Asian Cer
Fig. 7. Arrhenius plot of dc conductivity with variation of temperature.
Table 2
Activation energy values of different doping concentrations of cobalt.
Cobalt concentration Ea (eV) region II (low
temperature range:
363–473 K)
Ea (eV) region I (high
temperature range:
473–508 K)
active at the grain boundary. Hence, when the cobalt is doped, both
the potential barrier height and activation energy are raised to the
formation of barrier at the grain–grain interface. EaL with values of
.08–0.91 meV  for region I at low temperature region (363–453 K)
ary and EaH with values of 0.17–0.43 eV for region II at high tem-
perature region (473–508 K) respectively. The values of activation
energies suggest the shallow nature with deep donor levels along
with impurity level in band gap of Cobalt doped ZnO.
Thermal excitation of electrons from donor levels to the con-
duction band takes place for increase in temperature. Thermal
activations in region I is due to deep donor level ions contributing
fo the conduction band. With increase in doping of cobalt in ZnO
or temperature range (363–473 K), the values of activation energy
EaL) are decreasing due to donor carrier density which brings the
ermi level up in the band gap. At low temperature, for a doped
emiconductor most of the free electrons are recaptured by donors
tself. The electrons then do not have adequate energy to jump
rom donor levels to conduction band. By hopping from one level
o another in the impurity band they conduct, making the free elec-
ron band conduction less important [16]. Thus, the free electron
and conduction is no more a dominating conduction mechanism
n the low temperature range. Low temperature activation energy
f ZnO samples is possibly associated with one of the following two
onor ionization processes:
o + V+
o + e−
proposed by Simpson and Cordero [31] for oxygen vacancy (Vo)
r the zinc interstitials:
n + i → Zn+ + I + e−
The reversal takes place for high temperature range
473–508 K), where cobalt ions creates wide energy levels for
nO resulting in compensation for donor carrier density increasing
ctivation energy values. The high temperature activation energy
an be associated with desorption of O2
− species [32] according to
he equation, O−
2 + O2 + e−
[
[
amic Societies 5 (2017) 391–396 395
Here, region II corresponds to a transition region, in which more
charge carriers are ionized from the shallow donor level and then,
in turn, the depletion of charge carriers takes place. With increase in
temperature, more charge carriers overcome the activation energy
barrier and these carriers participate in the electrical conduction.
Due to the higher ionization potential of the substituted Co atoms
which cannot be easily ionized like Zn atoms, thus the donor con-
centration being lowered by the addition of Co and this results
in decrease in electrical conductivity. From DC conductivity stud-
ies, the potential barrier, donor concentration, point defects and
adsorption–desorption of oxygen are believed to be controlling the
conductivity of ZnO and Cobalt doped ceramic system.
4. Conclusions
Co doped ZnO nanoparticles were synthesized through co-
precipitation method and annealed at 673 K for 8 h. The X-ray
diffraction study confirmed that the synthesized ZnO nanopar-
ticles with hexagonal (wurtzite) crystal structure. Cobalt doping
in ZnO showed reduction in intensity for peak (101) at 36◦.
Microstructures of the nanoparticles have been examined by TEM
and evaluation of average particle size was  in the range of 20 nm.
SEM images of nanoparticles show the uniform shape with decreas-
ing grain size for samples of Zn(1-x)CoxO samples. A non-linear
decrease in electrical conductivity is observed with increasing
temperature among the samples. Temperature-dependent elec-
trical conductivity confirms the semiconducting nature of these
Zn(1-x)CoxO samples.