Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) plays major roles in extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling and membrane 
protein cleavage, suggesting a high correlation with cancer cell invasion and tumor metastasis. Here, we present 
a contrast agent based on a DNA aptamer that can selectively target human MMP-9 in the tumor microenvi-
ronment (TME) with high affinity and sensitivity. Surface modification of plasmonic gold nanospheres with the 
MMP-9 aptamer and its complementary sequences allows the nanospheres to aggregate in the presence of human 
MMP-9 through DNA displacement and hybridization. Aggregation of gold nanospheres enhances the optical 
absorption in the first near-infrared window (NIR-I) due to the plasmon coupling effect, thereby allowing us to 
detect the aggregated gold nanospheres within the TME via ultrasound-guided photoacoustic (US/PA) imaging. 
Selective and sensitive detection of human MMP-9 via US/PA imaging is demonstrated in solution of nanosensors 
with the pre-treatment of human MMP-9, in vitro in cell culture, and in vivo in a xenograft murine model of 
human breast cancer.   
1. Introduction 
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of zinc-dependent 
endopeptidases, which have specific proteolytic activity towards 
several substrates within the extracellular matrix (ECM) [1,2]. In 
particular, MMP-9 plays significant roles in ECM remodeling and 
membrane protein cleavage, suggesting a close association between 
MMP-9 and cancer pathologies including cancer cell invasion and 
metastasis [3]. Due to this relationship, MMP-9 is a good biological 
target molecule for detection or inactivation of cancer cells [4–6]. 
However, because of the structural and functional similarity within the 
MMP family of proteins, it has been quite challenging to detect/target 
MMP-9 with high selectivity and sensitivity, especially in complex in 
vivo environments [7]. 
Molecular photoacoustic (PA) imaging, a noninvasive imaging mo-
dality that leverages thermoelastic expansion caused by light absorp-
tion, has shown great potential in biomedical and clinical imaging 
applications [8,9]. PA imaging is highly advantageous under the guid-
ance of ultrasound (US) imaging. Ultrasound provides excellent 
anatomical images of tissue with high spatial resolution, while com-
plementary PA imaging can convey functional information with high 
contrast, resolution, imaging depth, and sensitivity [10]. Although 
endogenous contrast from tissue can produce PA signal, the use of an 
exogenous contrast agent can significantly enhance PA signal, allowing 
for better imaging of cellular and molecular events [11]. For example, a 
contrast agent that changes its optical absorption in response to a spe-
cific stimulus can be exploited as a PA-based biosensor for longitudinal 
detection in vivo [12]. PA imaging contrast depends on having distinct 
optical signatures between the imaging contrast agent and the back-
ground tissue; therefore, an optimal exogenous contrast agent should 
absorb at wavelengths where absorption of biological tissues is minimal. 
Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs), such as gold nanospheres (AuNSs) and 
gold nanorods (AuNRs), have been widely utilized as PA contrast agents 
because of their strong, tunable optical absorption [13–15]. 
Size-dependent localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) of AuNPs 
has been exploited to create contrast agents with an optimal absorbance 
range for the desired application [16–18]. The size-dependent absorp-
tion shift occurs when the AuNPs are interacting close enough to one 
another (within 10 nm) such that the surface electrons overlap, also 
known as the plasmon coupling effect [19–21]. This plasmon coupling 
opens the potential to use AuNPs as a biosensor by controlling their 
dynamic assembly/disassembly in response to a specific 
microenvironment or to the existence of a target biomolecule. For a 
plasmon coupling strategy, AuNSs are advantageous over other 
Au-based nanomaterials including AuNRs and Au nanostars. The optical 
absorption range of 650–900 nm, known as the first near infrared 
(NIR-I) window, is important for PA imaging as there is relatively low 
background optical absorption from tissue and high imaging penetration 
depth at these wavelengths. When AuNSs are singular and monodisperse 
particles, their maximum optical absorption is around 520 nm, with very 
low optical absorption from 650 to 900 nm. However, the optical ab-
sorption spectrum of the AuNSs redshifts and broadens upon aggrega-
tion. As a result, the optical absorption from 650 to 900 nm increases 
significantly for aggregated nanospheres compared to singular AuNSs. 
Therefore, AuNSs produce nearly on/off changes in the NIR-I window 
upon their assembly, enabling them to serve as PA nanosensors. Re-
searchers have leveraged various functional moieties that trigger the 
assembly/aggregation and disassembly based on charge conversion 
[22], changes in hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity balance [23], 
host-guest interaction [24], and DNA hybridization [25–27]. 
Exploiting DNA hybridization provides several advantages such as 
programmability, predictability, and biocompatibility [28]. In partic-
ular, oligomeric DNA sequences can be designed to transform their 
structures in response to a specific stimulus, such as pH or biomolecules, 
rather than forming a sequence-specific double-strand with their com-
plementary sequence [29,30]. DNA aptamers, oligonucleotides that 
bind to a specific target molecule, represent one class of functional 
oligomeric DNA sequences [31]. DNA aptamers are advantageous due to 
their ability to bind to specific target molecules with high affinity, 
selectivity, and specificity [32]. In this regard, we can design a 
double-strand of a DNA aptamer and its complementary sequence, 
which forms regular hydrogen bonds (Watson-Crick base pairing) in the 
absence of a target protein. In the presence of a target protein however, 
the DNA aptamer releases its complementary sequence to instead bind 
with the target protein, which is a more favorable interaction. Thus, the 
DNA aptamer can detect and silence target biomolecules through dy-
namic DNA displacement. 
Here we report a PA contrast agent as a biosensor for the detection of 
human MMP-9 (hMMP-9) by introducing programmed hybridization/ 
dehybridization of DNA aptamers on the surface of AuNSs. To develop 
the sensor, the surface of 15 nm-sized AuNSs was modified with two 
different sets of DNA strands to create AuNS-1 and AuNS-2, respectively. 
For AuNS-1, double strands of hMMP-9 aptamer and its partial com-
plementary sequence (comp-1) were grafted on the surface of AuNSs. To 
create AuNS-2, single stranded, full-match complementary sequences of 
comp-1 (comp-2) were conjugated on the surface. In the absence of 
MMP-9, the binding of comp-2 to comp-1 is blocked by pre-bound MMP- 
9 aptamers, maintaining the LSPR of 15 nm-sized AuNSs (a mixture of 
single nanospheres of AuNS-1 and AuNS-2). However, in the presence of 
hMMP-9, the MMP-9 aptamer DNA strand preferentially binds to the 
hMMP-9 protein instead of binding to the comp-1 to form the MMP- 
9–aptamer complex. The release of the MMP-9 aptamer sequence from 
AuNS-1 then enables the binding of comp-2 on AuNS-2 to comp-1 on 
AuNS-1, coupling AuNS-1 and AuNS-2 (Fig. 1a). The coupling of AuNS-1 
and AuNS-2 results in the aggregation of the AuNSs, inducing the LSPR 
changes. The hMMP-9-responsive aggregation and consequent optical 
absorption shift were detected by US-guided spectroscopic PA (sPA) 
imaging. A series of proof-of-concept studies of our sensor were carried 
out in solution of nanosensors with the pre-treatment of hMMP-9, in vitro 
in cell culture, and in vivo in a murine xenograft model of human breast 
cancer (Fig. 1b). 
2. Materials and methods 
2.1. Materials 
Gold chloride hydrate (HAuCl4), sodium citrate tribasic dihydrate, 
tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP), sodium chloride 
Fig. 1. Schematic illustration of a contrast agent for the detection of human matrix metalloproteinase-9 (hMMP-9). (a) Design of a plasmon coupling-based MMP 
sensor induced by the DNA displacement in the presence of the MMP-9. (b) Detection of the MMP-9 in the tumor microenvironment using the ultrasound-guided 
spectroscopic PA (US/sPA) imaging. 
(NaCl), magnesium chloride (MgCl2), tris base, and potassium cyanide 
(KCN) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) and used as 
received without further purification or modification. All oligonucleo-
tide sequences were purified by standard desalting and purchased from 
IDT Inc. (Coralville, IA). The sequences of the DNA strands are the 
following: MMP-9 aptamer, 5′– TCG TAT GGC ACG GGG TTG GTG TTG 
GGT TGG –3′ [33]; comp-1 of MMP-9 aptamer, 5′– GGT GTG CCA TAC 
GAA A/3ThioMC3-D/ –3′; comp-2 of MMP-9 aptamer, 5′– TCG TAT GGC 
ACA CCA A/3ThioMC3-D/ –3′; control aptamer, 5′– CCG GTG TTC GAG 
ACA AGA GTC CAG GG –3′; comp-1 of control aptamer, 5′– CTC TCG 
AAC ACC GGA A/3ThioMC3-D/ –3′; comp-2 of control aptamer, 5′– CCG 
GTG TTC GAG AGA A/3ThioMC3-D/ –3′, where /3ThioMC3-D/ stands 
for 3-(butyldisulfaneyl)propan-1-ol to provide a disulfide structure at 
the 3′ end of the DNA strands. Human recombinant MMP-9 and MMP-7 
was purchased from BioVision (Milpitas, CA). 
2.2. Synthesis of aptamer-decorated AuNSs 
Synthesis of 15 nm-sized, citrate-capped AuNSs was conducted ac-
cording to the previously reported method with slight modification [34]. 
In brief, HAuCl4 (1.47 mM, 10 mL) and sodium citrate tribasic (0.334 M, 
200 µL) were mixed under mild stirring at 80 ◦C for 20 min to synthesize 
AuNSs. To modify the surface of citrate-capped AuNSs and create 
AuNS-1, the comp-1 and aptamer sequences were annealed in phosphate 
buffer (10 mM) containing MgCl2 (1 mM) and NaCl (20 mM) to form 
double-strands. The annealed DNA strands were incubated in acetate 
buffer (pH = 5.2, 50 mM) with TCEP (1 mM) for 1 h to activate the thiol 
group. The aptamer/comp-1 duplexes were then added dropwise to 
7 nM citrate capped AuNSs with a ratio of 1:50 (AuNS:duplex), followed 
by salt aging for 24 h. To create AuNS-2, the thiol groups in comp-2 
single strands were activated as described for aptamer/comp-1 du-
plexes, then added dropwise to 7 nM citrate capped AuNSs with a molar 
ratio of 1:100 (AuNS:single strand), followed by salt aging for 24 h. The 
final AuNS-1 and AuNS-2 were purified by centrifugation (16,100 rcf, 
30 min) with tris-acetate buffer (pH = 8.2, 25 mM) and NaCl (0.1 M). 
2.3. Aggregation monitoring of AuNSs with the pre-treatment of hMMP-9 
The mixture solution of AuNS-1 and AuNS-2 (1:1 ratio, 5 nM of Au in 
200 µL of 25 mM tris-acetate buffer) was incubated at 37 ◦C in a hu-
midified incubator with the hMMP-9 stock solution to reach a final 
hMMP-9 concentration of 0.04–5 µg/mL (1.03–128 nM of hMMP-9). 
After 24 h incubation, the optical absorption spectra were measured 
with a UV–vis spectrophotometer (Evolution 220, Thermo Scientific), 
the hydrodynamic size was checked with a Dynamic Light Scattering 
instrument (Zetasizer Nano ZS, Malvern Instruments Ltd.), and the size 
and morphology were characterized with transmission electron micro-
scopy (TEM) (HT7700, Hitachi). 
2.4. Phantom preparation and US/sPA imaging 
The tube phantom was prepared by adding 40 µL of the MMP sensor 
solution (2.5 nM of AuNS-1 and AuNS-2) with MMP-9, BSA, and MMP-7 
(2.5 µg/mL each, 64 nM of hMMP-9) into polyethylene tubes held in 3D- 
printed housing. The prepared phantom was imaged using the 
Vevo2100/LAZR imaging system (FujiFilm VisualSonics, Inc.). US/sPA 
images were acquired using an LZ250 transducer, which is a 256- 
element ultrasound transducer array operating at 18.5 MHz center fre-
quency. The LAZR (laser source) is a Q-switched Nd:YAG pumped op-
tical parametric oscillator (OPO) laser (pulse duration = 7 ns; frame 
rate = 5 Hz). For spectroscopic PA analysis, the phantom was imaged 
using wavelengths from 680 to 970 nm in 2 nm intervals. The repre-
sentative tube phantom image was acquired at 700 nm with 3D mode, 
followed by image reconstitution using maximum intensity projection 
(MIP) in VevoLAB 2.2 software (FujiFilm Visualsonics, Inc.). The gelatin 
phantom’s base consisted of 8% gelatin and 0.2% silica (0.25 µm 
diameter). The inclusions were prepared by mixing the MMP sensor at 
different conditions with the same volume of heated 16% gelatin solu-
tion. The prepared inclusions were loaded on the phantom base to create 
dome-shaped phantoms for imaging with the same Vevo2100/LAZR 
imaging system. Each dome-shaped inclusion was imaged using wave-
lengths from 680 to 970 nm in 2 nm intervals. All data was exported and 
processed in VevoLAB 2.2 software and post-processed in MATLAB 
(MathWorks, Inc.). 
2.5. Cell culture 
MDA-MB-231 human breast adenocarcinoma cells were cultured in 
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM, Corning) supplemented 
with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Corning), 100 I.U./mL penicillin and 
100 µg/mL streptomycin. Cells were incubated at 37 ◦C in a 5% CO2 
humidified incubator. 
2.6. In vitro toxicity test 
MDA-MB-231 cells in culture medium were seeded in a 96-well plate 
at an initial density of 8 × 103 cells/well and incubated at 37 ◦C in a 5% 
CO2 humidified incubator overnight. The next day, the MMP sensor was 
added to cells to yield a final concentration of 0.3125, 0.625, 1.25, 2.5, 
5, and 10 nM in solution. One group contained no MMP and received 
PBS as a control. Cells were then further incubated for 24 h, followed by 
washing with PBS three times to remove nanoparticles prior to the 
viability assay. Culture medium with 0.5 mg/mL of 3-(4,5-Dimethylth-
iazol-2-yl)-2,5-Diphenyltetrazolium Bromide (MTT) was added to each 
well. After 4 h, the solution was removed and the formazan salt on the 
bottom of the well plate was dissolved by adding 200 µL of DMSO. The 
absorbance at 590 nm was measured using a multi-well plate reader 
(Synergy HT, BioTek), with the cells treated with PBS considered as 
100% viable. 
2.7. In vitro transwell study 
MDA-MB-231 cells were cultured in phenol red-free medium and 
were seeded on the upper compartment of a transwell insert (12 mm 
transwell with a polyester membrane, pore size = 0.4 µm) at an initial 
density of 2 × 105 cells/insert and incubated at 37 ◦C in a 5% CO2 hu-
midified incubator overnight. Then, 10 µL of 100 µg/mL phorbol 12- 
myristate 13-acetate (PMA) in DMSO were added on the upper 
compartment of the transwell insert and further incubated for 24 h. 
After 24 h, the lower compartment of the 12-well plate was filled with 
phenol red-free culture media containing 2.5 nM of MMP sensor and its 
derivatives. The solution (100 µL) in the lower compartment was 
collected at different time points (initial, 1, 4, 12, 24 h) and concen-
trated to the final volume of 40 µL, followed by the preparation of dome- 
shaped 8% gelatin inclusions as described above. The inclusions were 
imaged using the aforementioned Vevo2100/LAZR imaging system with 
the same protocol. 
2.8. In vivo imaging 
All animal procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal 
Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at Georgia Institute of Technology and 
were performed in accordance with the federal guidelines for the care 
and use of laboratory animals. MDA-MB-231 cells were inoculated 
subcutaneously (s.c.) into the flank of 6-week-old female NU/NU mice 
(Charles River) at an initial density of 1 × 107 cells in 50% Matrigel 
(Corning). After the average tumor volume reached over 100 mm3, 
200 µL of 500 µg/mL PMA in 10% DMSO were injected intraperitoneally 
48 h before imaging according to previously established methods [35]. 
After 24 h, the MMP sensor/control sensor (same quantity of AuNS-1 
and AuNS-2 mixture at OD = 5, 100 µL) was injected peritumorally. 
US/sPA imaging was performed after another 24 h, where the mice were 
J. Kim et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Photoacoustics 25 (2022) 100307
4
anesthetized and placed on a heated translational motor stage. In vivo 
images were acquired with a 40 MHz ultrasound transducer (LZ-550) 
coupled with a fiber optic bundle for photoacoustic imaging. All data 
was exported using the VevoLAB 2.2 software (FujiFilm Visual Sonics, 
Inc.) and post-processed in MATLAB (MathWorks, Inc.). Photoacoustic 
spectra were corrected for wavelength-dependent laser energy fluctua-
tion using local background signal outside the tissue boundary. Photo-
acoustic images were median filtered to remove large spikes and mean 
filtered to smooth before being spectroscopically analyzed over the 
entire OPO wavelength range of 680–970 nm. 
2.9. Photoacoustic tomography 
All photoacoustic tomography images were collected using the Tri-
Tom system (Photosound Technologies, Inc.), a photoacoustic- 
fluorescence tomography (PAFT) 3D imaging system. The TriTom sys-
tem was paired with the Phocus Mobile HE laser system (Opotek, Inc.) 
for OPO operation, which produces a 690–950 nm 10 Hz pulsed output 
pumped by a 1064 nm Nd:YAG laser. For 532 nm operation, the TriTom 
system was paired with a Vibrant 532-I (Opotek, Inc.), another 10 Hz 
pulsed Nd:YAG laser which produces 532 nm output from its second 
harmonic generator. Excitation laser beams are directed to the imaging 
chamber using multi-output randomized fiber bundles. Mice are 
immersed in a heated water bath within a glass imaging tank, with ox-
ygen and inhalable anesthesia available for in vivo imaging. Data is ac-
quired by rotating the target within the FOV of a curved array 
transducer, generating a spherical sensor map. Image reconstruction 
was performed using Photosound software, and volume visualization 
was performed using 3D Slicer, a free open-source image processing 
software. 
3. Results 
Prior to modifying DNA sequences on the AuNSs, the hybridization 
of each strand was confirmed by 15% polyacrylamide gel electropho-
resis (PAGE). The addition of the comp-2 sequence to the pre-formed 
duplex of aptamer–comp-1 did not displace the original hybridization 
between the aptamer and comp-1. Meanwhile, the addition of comp-2 in 
the absence of the aptamer successfully created double-stranded DNA 
(Fig. S1). This result suggests the formation of the MMP-9–aptamer 
complex and the exposure of the comp-1 sequence would allow the 
aggregation of AuNS-1 and AuNS-2 via sequence-specific hybridization. 
With that, the surface of the 15-nm AuNSs was modified with hMMP 
aptamer–comp-1 duplexes (AuNS-1) or comp-2 single strands (AuNS-2) 
by a salt aging process reported elsewhere [36]. AuNS-1 and AuNS-2 for 
the MMP sensor contain ~26 double-strands and ~38 single strands, 
respectively. The surface modification of AuNSs did not show a 
remarkable absorption shift or aggregation in the UV–vis spectrum and 
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis (Fig. S2). Similarly, we 
designed and characterized a control MMP sensor with random DNA 
sequences (see experimental section for detailed DNA sequences), which 
did not respond to hMMP-9, to compare the responsiveness to the 
experimental MMP sensor (Fig. S3). 
We then confirmed the assembly of the MMP sensor (5 nM of AuNS-1 
and AuNS-2) in response to the target protein (5 µg/mL or 128 nM of 
hMMP-9) by co-incubating them in buffer solution for 24 h. In colori-
metric monitoring, without hMMP-9 (incubation with buffer) or with 
the addition of random protein (bovine serum albumin, BSA), the color 
of the sensor solution did not change, indicating there was no plasmon 
coupling. In contrast, the solution containing both the MMP sensor and 
hMMP-9 changed color, due to the plasmon coupling induced by the 
MMP-9–aptamer complex formation and subsequent binding of comp-1 
and comp-2 (Fig. 2a). The UV–vis spectra further confirmed the red-shift 
of the MMP sensor only in the case of incubation with the target protein, 
hMMP-9 (Fig. 2b). Furthermore, we tested the optical absorption shift as 
the concentration of hMMP-9 ranged from 0.04 to 5 µg/mL 
(1.03–128 nM), which demonstrated that a higher concentration of 
hMMP-9 induced more aggregation of AuNSs (Fig. S4). In addition, the 
Fig. 2. MMP-9-responsive aggregation of gold nanospheres (AuNSs). (a) Color changes of the MMP sensor without hMMP-9, with hMMP-9, and with bovine serum 
albumin (BSA) before (0 h, upper image) and after 24 h (lower image). (b) UV–vis spectra and (c) hydrodynamic size of the MMP sensor without hMMP-9, with 
hMMP-9, and with BSA after 24 h. (d) Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of the MMP sensor without hMMP-9 (left), with hMMP-9 (middle), and with 
BSA (right). Scale bar = 200 nm. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) 
J. Kim et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Photoacoustics 25 (2022) 100307
5
selective aggregation of the MMP sensor to hMMP-9 was monitored by 
measuring size with dynamic light scattering (DLS) and TEM. Without 
hMMP-9 or when co-incubated with a control protein, the sensor did not 
change in size or morphology (Fig. 2c and d). These results support our 
sensor’s potential as a PA imaging agent. 
To evaluate the potential of our MMP sensor in sPA imaging, we 
prepared the MMP sensor (2.5 nM of AuNS-1 and AuNS-2) with BSA, 
hMMP-7, and hMMP-9 (2.5 µg/mL respectively) in a polyethylene (PE) 
tube phantom and subsequently imaged the phantom using the Vevo 
2100/LAZR imaging system. Qualitatively, our MMP sensor pre-treated 
with hMMP-9 showed a strong PA signal at 700 nm compared to signals 
from the sensor incubated with BSA or hMMP-7 (Fig. 3a). The repre-
sentative PA spectrum of the MMP sensor with hMMP-9 showed a 10- 
fold higher PA signal at 700 nm than the MMP sensor with BSA or 
hMMP-7 (Fig. 3b), demonstrating the selectivity of our MMP sensor 
towards hMMP-9. We further imaged the MMP sensor with/without 
hMMP-9 in a thin polytetrafluoroethylene (PFTE) tube phantom using a 
photoacoustic tomography (PAT) imaging system (TriTom, PST Inc.) at 
532 nm and from 680 to 970 nm (Fig. S5). PAT phantom studies further 
corroborated previous UV–vis (Fig. 2b) and PA results from the Vevo 
2100/LAZR (Fig. 3). Similarly, the MMP sensor with hMMP-9 in the PAT 
phantom exhibited a stronger PA signal from 680 to 970 nm and a 
weaker PA signal at 532 nm compared to controls (no hMMP-9 or with 
control protein, BSA). It is worth noting that the wavelengths ranging 
from 650 to 900 nm are in the NIR-I window where light has its 
maximum penetration depth and relatively low background optical 
absorption in tissue. Therefore, our MMP sensor, exhibiting strong PA 
signal over the wavelength range of 680–970 nm, offers huge potential 
for more complex in vivo detection of hMMP-9, with enhanced optical 
absorption at ideal wavelengths in response to the target protein. 
Next, we tested in vitro hMMP-9 detection secreted from MDA-MB- 
231 human breast cancer cells. MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded on the 
semi-permeable membrane of the upper insert of a transwell plate. MMP 
sensors suspended in cell culture medium were incubated in the lower 
compartment of the transwell to detect secreted hMMP-9. The MMP 
sensor-containing media was collected at different time intervals and 
embedded in a dome-shaped 8% gelatin phantom to monitor our sen-
sor’s longitudinal behavior in US/sPA imaging (Fig. 4a). PA signals at 
680–970 nm were gradually enhanced until 24 h as higher amounts of 
hMMP-9 were transferred from cells to the lower compartment with 
increasing incubation time, demonstrating the quantitative detection of 
hMMP-9 (Fig. 4b and c). In contrast, when we replaced the MMP sensor 
at the lower transwell compartment with the control sensor decorated 
with random/scrambled DNA sequences (Fig. S3), the PA images at the 
680–970 nm did not exhibit any distinct signal (Fig. S6). Furthermore, 
the UV–vis spectrum of the MMP sensor in the culture medium or of the 
control sensor in the medium were well-correlated with the corre-
sponding PA spectrum (Fig. S7). In addition, MDA-MB-231 cells treated 
with the MMP sensor did not exhibit noticeable toxicity up to 10 nM 
while only 2.5 nM of our MMP sensor was needed for the detection of 
hMMP-9, reducing the toxicity concerns of our MMP sensor (Fig. S8). 
Together, these results show successful demonstration of our MMP 
sensor for the selective detection of hMMP-9 at the cellular level by 
leveraging hybridization of the MMP-9 aptamer and related DNA 
sequences. 
Finally, we detected hMMP-9 in vivo using our MMP sensor as a 
contrast agent for US/sPA imaging and PAT in a xenograft mouse model 
of breast cancer (MDA-MB-231). For US/sPA imaging using the Vevo 
2100/LAZR system, mice were subcutaneously injected with MDA-MB- 
231 cells. Tumors continued to grow over a period of 6 weeks until 
the size was over 100 mm3. The mice were injected with the MMP sensor 
and two controls, saline only and the control sensor, 24 h before imag-
ing. Multiwavelength photoacoustic datasets were acquired under ul-
trasound guidance. The saline control and control sensor showed 
minimal PA signal. The PA spectrum of the MMP sensor in vivo closely 
matched in vitro results. Both showed a maximum PA signal at 710 nm 
(Fig. 4c), likely resulting from the aggregation of AuNS-1 and AuNS-2 
upon formation of the MMP-9–aptamer complex (Fig. 5a). To visualize 
the distribution and detectability of the MMP sensors volumetrically, the 
TriTom system was used to perform photoacoustic tomography, gener-
ating 3-dimensional maps of the skin and surface vasculature (532 nm, 
yellow) and the aggregated AuNSs (710 nm, red) upon the peritumoral 
injection of the saline only, control sensor, and MMP sensor (Fig. 5b). In 
the mice injected with saline (Movie S1) or control sensor (Movie S2), 
signals from surface vasculature (532 nm) were observed, while the 
signal from aggregated AuNSs (710 nm) was not detected at the tumor 
periphery, indicated by the light blue circle. However, the aggregated 
MMP sensor was clearly detected using PAT, with a majority of the 
710 nm signal distributed in the tumor (Movie S3). The results from both 
the Vevo LAZR and TriTom imaging systems illustrates the feasibility of 
the developed sensor as a contrast agent for detection of hMMP-9 in vivo 
via molecular PA imaging. 
Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at 
doi:10.1016/j.pacs.2021.100307. 
4. Discussion 
In the current study, we demonstrated functional oligomeric DNA- 
modified AuNSs for detecting hMMP-9 in vivo. The use of DNA aptam-
ers for AuNS-based nanosensors enabled sensitive and selective detec-
tion of hMMP-9. Controlling the assembly of AuNSs and their plasmon 
coupling based on DNA strand displacement was a unique approach to 
Fig. 3. Spectroscopic PA imaging of the MMP sensor 24 h after the pre-treatment with hMMP-9 and assorted controls. (a) Maximum intensity projection (MIP)- 
reconstituted US/PA overlay image at 700 nm of PBS and the MMP sensor (2.5 nM of AuNS-2 and AuNS-2) with the hMMP-9, hMMP-7, and BSA (2.5 µg/mL) in a 
tube phantom. (b) PA intensity of the MMP sensor at 680–970 nm. 
J. Kim et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Photoacoustics 25 (2022) 100307
6
create distinct spectral signatures for spectroscopic PA imaging. More-
over, the scrambled sequence-modified AuNSs (control sensor) did not 
exhibit random aggregation in vitro or in vivo, demonstrating the sta-
bility of oligomeric DNA-modified AuNSs in a biological microenvi-
ronment. Furthermore, binding of the target biomolecule with the DNA 
aptamer is highly sequence-dependent. In the future, introducing a set of 
orthogonal aptamers that target different biomolecules can allow 
multiplex US/PA imaging to monitor the biomolecular profile of a 
microenvironment. Thus, programmable design of DNA sequences and 
strategic selection of the DNA aptamer allows almost infinite combina-
tions for biomolecule detection to develop a robust US/PA imaging 
platform. 
In the complex tumor microenvironment, MMP-9 is secreted from 
multiple types of cells, including macrophages, fibroblasts, endothelial 
cells, stromal cells, and cancer cells [3]. As a model for our 
proof-of-concept study, we selected human breast cancer cells for the 
source of human MMP-9 expression. MMP-9 expression is regulated by 
cytokines and signal transduction pathways. Thus, MDA-MB-231 human 
breast cancer cells required pre-treatment with PMA in vitro and in vivo 
to activate the NF-κB pathway that secretes hMMP-9 as confirmed by an 
ELISA of hMMP-9 (Fig. S9a). Without a stimulus for pathway activation, 
MDA-MB-231 cancer cells themselves produce negligible amounts of 
hMMP-9 in xenograft models [37]. Therefore, to validate our model 
system, we compared the PA signal of the MMP sensor with and without 
pre-treating MDA-MB-231 cells with PMA. Without PMA pre-treatment, 
the PA signal from the MMP sensor was negligible over the entire OPO 
wavelength range of 680–970 nm, confirming that PMA is required in 
our model system (Fig. S9b–d). Moreover, this result further supports 
our main hypothesis that the secreted hMMP-9 from the cells triggers the 
aggregation by forming an MMP-9–aptamer complex. From a trans-
lational perspective, pretreatment with PMA would not be required. 
Unlike the xenograft model, the secretion of hMMP-9 in humans will be 
orchestrated by multiple cell types, including macrophages, fibroblasts, 
endothelial cells, stromal cells, and cancer cells at the tumor site [3]. 
Therefore, hMMP-9 can be produced endogenously with no further 
stimulation. 
Previous studies of in vivo MMP or protease sensors employed the 
catalytic activity of MMPs to cleave a specific chemical bond or degrade 
polymer structure for detection [38–41]. In the current study, the MMP 
sensor is based on structural one-to-one binding of the hMMP-9 protein 
to the DNA aptamer. This protein binding to the DNA aptamer could be 
applied not only for the detection of the target protein, as we demon-
strated here, but also for the selective capture and deactivation of the 
target protein. Selective capture and deactivation of disease-related 
pathogenic proteins at the disease site can impact disease progression. 
In this case, hMMP-9 is highly related to ECM remodeling and cancer 
progression. Our MMP sensor can serve as a theranostic agent by 
detecting and deactivating hMMP-9 through selective capture with DNA 
aptamers, which may inhibit tumor growth by preventing ECM 
remodeling. 
5. Conclusions 
In summary, we have developed a PA biosensor to detect hMMP-9 by 
exploiting plasmonic AuNSs and DNA aptamers. The use of DNA 
aptamers enabled sensitive and selective detection of hMMP-9, while the 
plasmon coupling between AuNSs by programmable DNA hybridization 
resulted in selective PA signal amplification in the NIR-I optical window. 
Moreover, the versatility and customizability of oligomeric DNA se-
quences will enable the design of other AuNS-based sensors for the 
detection and capture of biomolecules by utilizing the corresponding 
aptamer sequence. By incorporating multiple aptamers that target 
different biomolecules on the nanoparticles, our approach provides 
unlimited opportunities to develop contrast agents for multiplex imag-
ing of biomolecules. 
Funding 
This work was supported by the Breast Cancer Research Foundation 
(BCRF-20-043) and the National Institute of Health (EB015007, 
EY030071, NS102860, NS117613). 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
Fig. 4. Time-dependent spectroscopic PA imaging in a transwell. (a) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup. (b) US, PA, and overlay image of the MMP 
sensor in the lower compartment of the transwell at 0, 1, 4, 12, 24 h after incubation. Scale bar = 2 mm. (c) Incubation time-dependent PA intensity of the MMP 
sensor at 680–970 nm. 
J. Kim et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
Photoacoustics 25 (2022) 100307
7
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgments 
We acknowledge Dr. Younan Xia and Ruhui Chen of Georgia Institute 
of Technology for assistance with UV–vis spectrophotometer measure-
ments and Anamik Jhunjhunwala of Georgia Institute of Technology for 
helping with tube phantom imaging. 
Appendix A. Supporting information 
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the 
online version at doi:10.1016/j.pacs.2021.100307.