The paper investigates single band planar resonant antenna inspired by phi-shaped slotted metamaterial superstrate and a square
atch antenna is used as a primary radiator. The antenna is modeled using finite difference time domain method and resonates at S
and. The antenna comprises of single layer symmetrical metamaterial superstrate which is used to suppress surface waves based
n -negative characteristics. The effective material parameters of the metamaterial structure are extracted from S-parameters using
icholson–Ross–Weir method. The antenna achieves −28.64 dB reflection coefficient of 2.4 GHz and also maintains good radiation
haracteristics with a peak measured gain of 7.94 dB at its operating frequency. Due to its advantages, the antenna can be used for
odern wireless communications.
 2018 Electronics Research Institute (ERI). Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC
Y-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
eywords: Patch antenna; Metamaterials; Nicholson–Ross–Weir method; Radiation pattern; Surface waves
.  Introduction
In last few decades the growth of photonic crystal plays a major role in the field of microwave circuits and antennas
ue to their enhanced propagation characteristics and to suppress harmonics frequencies and hence many researchers
tilize photonic crystal substrate in microwave and antenna applications. Yablonovitch et al. (1989), experimentally
emonstrates the propagation of electromagnetic waves in the photonic crystals like glass substrate and achieves bandwidth of 2 GHz around 6.5 GHz operating frequency. Horii and Tsutsumi (1999) presented microstrip patch
ntenna having two-dimensional photonic bandgap (PBG) in the ground plane to suppress harmonic frequencies of
he antenna. However these glass substrates have high permittivity and permeability compare to traditional substrates
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: rs.sm0914@hindustanuniv.ac.in (S. M.).
Peer review under the responsibility of Electronics Research Institute (ERI).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesit.2018.04.002
314-7172/© 2018 Electronics Research Institute (ERI). Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC
Y-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
264 S. M. et al. / Journal of Electrical Systems and Information Technology 5 (2018) 263–270
and makes the antenna less suitable at higher frequencies. This brings the use of metamaterial inspired glass substrates
having negative material properties in antenna substrates. This was initially observed by Veselago (1968) and predicted
that the EM wave in a medium flow directly opposite the direction of energy in the left handed materials having negative
material properties. This principle was experimentally verified by Smith and Kroll (2000) by placing periodic structures
of slip ring resonator in a negative refraction material. Nowadays these metamaterial substrates have been utilized by
many researchers for improving performance of the antenna. Lubkoswski et al. (2009), show the advantages of using
metamaterials in improving gain and directivity of the antenna and noted that directivity of antenna is improved for
low dielectric materials especially at high frequencies. Song et al. (2011) proposed L-shaped left handed material for
enhancing the gain of the patch antenna. The model uses periodic metamaterial structure around the patch in order
to suppress the surface wave and thereby enhancing gain of the antenna. One more method of improving gain of the
conventional antenna is by embedding metamaterial inspired 3D resonator structures in the Low Temperature Co-Fired
Ceramic (LTCC) Substrate (Liu et al., 2013). This achieves a compact structure achieving narrow beamwidth and also
it increases the fabrication complexity of the antenna. Gao et al. (2016) presented metamaterial inspired dual layer
rectangular ring structure integrated around the periphery of patch antenna for improving gain and bandwidth of the
antenna. Pires et al. (2013) presented a metamaterial inspired wired antenna instead of traditional planar structured
metamaterials discussed above. However these antennas achieve poor gain in the operating frequency. Brown et al.
(1998) fabricated bowtie antenna on photonic crystal substrate and measured the radiation properties (Brown and
Parker, 1993). They observed that in planar antenna modeled on conventional silicon substrate, most of the power is
radiated in to the substrate and hence reduces the gain and directivity of the antenna. The second characteristics is
that the power radiated in to the substrate at an angle greater than θc =  Sin−1ε
−1
2 will get total internally reflected in
to substrate and gets trapped. However photonic crystal eliminates these problems due to its non-reactive impedance
properties on homogeneous dielectric substrate. Hence the proposed metamaterial unit cell structure is modelled on
photonic crystal substrate instead of conventional substrate.
This paper presents metamaterial inspired phi-shaped slot patch antenna operating at 2.4 GHz. The performance
of the patch antenna is analyzed by finite difference time domain (FDTD) method using high frequency structure
simulator. FDTD method is a numerical analysis method for modelling computational electromagnetics. The proposed
geometry is modelled using Ansys High Frequency Structure Simulator (HFSS) which uses FDTD method of maxwell’s
equation and forms computational domain and grid materials and determines E and H fields at a point or series of points
within computational domain. The metamaterial properties are extracted from S parameters using Nicolson–Ross–Weir
method (NRW) (Ziolkowski, 2003). The metamaterial achieves simultaneous negative permittivity and permeability at
2.4 GHz and is incorporated with conventional patch antenna to improve its gain performance and reduce the reflection
coefficient and hence the antenna finds application in modern wireless communications.
2.  Geometry  of  metamaterial  unit  cell  and  its  performance  characteristics
Fig. 1(a) shows the geometry of proposed metamaterial unit cell. The geometry consists of phi-shaped slot etched
in square conductor having a dimension of 35 mm ×  35 mm. Because of its geometry, the electrical length of the
antenna is much larger than its actual physical size and hence introduce additional phase delays in the surface waves
propagating over it and thereby stores and re-radiates energy. Thus metamaterials is used to improve antenna radiated
power with increased directivity. The structure is modeled on photonic crystal substrate having a permittivity (ε) of 5.5
and permeability (μ) of 1. A thin line strip passes at bottom of the substrate for excitation of metamaterial structure.
The boundary condition for the metamaterial unit cell is shown in Fig. 1(b). The boundary conditions are set in such
way that the electric field components propagate normal to the photonic crystal substrate and magnetic field propagates
parallel to the substrate. The performance of the metamaterial unit cell antenna structure is characterized using FDTD
method and corresponding S parameters are obtained as shown in Fig. 2.
It is observed from Fig. 2(a) that S11 and S21 parameters crosses at 1.25 GHz and 2 GHz. This shows that the unit
cell structure has a bandgap between 1.25 GHz–2 GHz where electromagnetic waves are reflected which makes the
structure to have negative material properties. Hence the unit cell structure resonates at 1.5 GHz and has a bandgap
between 1.25 GHz–2 GHz. Fig. 2(b) clearly shows electromagnetic waves propagates in opposite direction of excitation
input port 1. The permittivity (ε) and permeability (μ) of the proposed metamaterial unit cell is extracted by using
NRW method (Ziolkowski, 2003) as shown below.
S. M. et al. / Journal of Electrical Systems and Information Technology 5 (2018) 263–270 265
Fig. 1. Metamaterial geometry.Fig. 2. S Parameters for the metamaterial unit cell.
The transmission coefficient (T) and reflection coefficient (¥Ã) is given by
T = S11 +  S22 −  
1 −  (S11 +  S21)
(1)
 =  X  ±
√
X2 −  1 (2)
Where X  = S11
2 −  S21
2 +  1
2S11
(3)
The permeability (μ) is given by
μ  = 1 +  
 (1 −  )
√
1 − 1
(4)λ0
2 λc
2
Where
1
Λ2 =
(
εr ∗  μr
λ0
2 − 1
λc
2
)
= −
(
1
2πL
ln
(
1
T
))2
(5)
266 S. M. et al. / Journal of Electrical Systems and Information Technology 5 (2018) 263–270Fig. 3. Metamaterial material properties.
The permittivity (ε) is given by
ε  = λ0
2
μr
(
1
λc
2 −
(
1
2πL
ln
(
1
T
))2
)
(6)
Fig. 3 shows the negative permittivity (ε) and permeability (μ) of the given metamaterial structure extracted from
S parameters using NRW method.
3.  Geometry  of  proposed  patch  antenna  and  its  performance  characteristics
Fig. 4 shows the geometry of the proposed antenna integrated with metamaterial inspired superstrate. The proposed
antenna is modeled using ansys high frequency structure simulator using FDTD method. The photonic crystal is used
as a superstrate which has a thickness of 1.6 mm and size of 61.25 mm ×  61.25 mm and is placed at 1.6 mm above
the patch antenna model. An array of 5 ×  5 metamaterial unit cells is etched on superstrate in order to enhance the
performance of the patch antenna.
A square shaped patch antenna of size 40 mm ×  40 mm is used as a primary radiator. The patch is engraved on FR4
substrate having a thickness of 1.6 mm and a size of 61.25 mm × 61.25 mm. In order to validate the performance of the
proposed model, the antenna fabricated and are analyzed using agilent network analyzer (N9925A) and antenna test
systems. Fig. 5(a) shows fabricated model in which metamaterial structure is etched in conventional FR4 superstrate
placed over rectangular patch radiator. Fig. 5(b) shows proposed fabricated model in which metamaterial structure is
S. M. et al. / Journal of Electrical Systems and Information Technology 5 (2018) 263–270 267
e
a
a
m
a
m
o
F
d
a
m
A
a
Fig. 4. Geometry of patch antenna with metamaterial inspired superstrate.
tched in photo crystal superstrate placed over rectangular patch radiator. Both the fabricated model are analyzed using
gilent network analyzer (N9925A) and antenna test systems and the results are compared with conventional patch
ntenna.
Fig. 6 depicts the reflection coefficient (S11 (dB)) curve as a function of operating frequency obtained using FDTD
ethod. The reflection coefficient curve compare proposed model with standard patch without metamaterial superstrate
nd metamaterial with FR4 superstrate structure operating at same frequency. It is observed that the proposed antenna
odel integrated with metamaterial photonic crystal superstrate reduces reflection coefficient significantly in the
perating frequency when compared with other models.
Radiation characteristics of the proposed antenna model are compared with standard patch antenna and are given in
ig. 7. It is observed that the proposed model improves the gain of the antenna compared with conventional antenna. It is
ue to the fact that additions of metamaterial superstrate suppress the surface waves due to its negative μ  characteristics
nd hence results in significant improvement in gain as shown in Fig. 7.The antenna gives a simulated gain of around 6.96 dB for conventional patch antenna and 7.92 dB for FR4 superstrate
odel and 9.67 dB for photonic crystal superstrate model. The measured gain is calculated using two antenna method.
 standard pyramidal horn antenna having a gain of 9 dB is used as a reference antenna. The distance between two
ntennas (R) is measured and the gain is calculated using Friis transmission equation given below
268 S. M. et al. / Journal of Electrical Systems and Information Technology 5 (2018) 263–270
Fig. 5. Fabricated prototype model.
Fig. 6. Reflection coefficient (dB).
Table 1
Performance comparison of proposed model with conventional antenna.
Antenna Geometry Parameter
Reflection coefficient (dB) Bandwidth (S11 = −10 dB) Gain (dB)
Simulated Measured Simulated Measured Simulated Measured
Conventional Patch Antenna −15.27 dB −20.15 dB 52 MHz 65 MHz 6.96 dB 5.41 dB
FR4 Superstrate −19.80 dB −24.74 dB 43 MHz 55 MHz 7.92 dB 6.56 dB
Photonics Superstrate −27.43 dB −28.64 dB 48 MHz 55 MHz 9.67 dB 7.94 dB
Pr
Pt
=
(
λ
4πR
)2
GtGr (7)
From Fig. 7, it is observed that the antenna gives symmetrical radiation pattern and achieved a measured gain
of 5.41 dB for conventional patch antenna and 6.56 dB for FR4 superstrate model and 7.94 dB for photonic crystal
superstrate model. Table 1 gives performance comparison of proposed antenna structure with conventional antenna
structure. It is observed that the proposed model with photonic superstrate structure gives better reflection coefficients
when compared to conventional and FR4 superstrate structures. In order to improve the gain characteristics of the
antenna, a metamaterial superstrate is placed over the radiating antenna element which improves directivity (Bait-
Suwailam et al., 2010) and reducing mutual coupling effect (Yang et al., 2012). However the presence of superstrate
over the radiating element in the proposed structure has negative effect over operating bandwidth due to its narrowband
characteristics (Gao et al., 2016) and hence restricts the bandwidth which is observed from Table 1. Though the
S. M. et al. / Journal of Electrical Systems and Information Technology 5 (2018) 263–270 269
p
o
l
4
m
u
t
v
−
g
c
Fig. 7. Radiation Pattern.
roposed antenna has narrowband characteristics, the antenna better gain performance and lesser reflection coefficient
ver operating band when compared to conventional antenna and hence suitable for narrowband high gain applications
ike radar altimeter and other modern wireless communication.
.  Conclusion
In this manuscript metamaterial inspired patch antenna is presented. The proposed model is integrated with meta-
aterial superstrate in order to improve the gain and reduce the reflection coefficient. The model is characterized
sing FDTD method and its material parameters are extracted by NRW method using Matlab tool. It is observed
hat the proposed metamaterial structure achieves negative permeability and permittivity and its integration with con-
entional patch antenna significantly improves gain and also reduces the reflection coefficient. The antenna achieves
28.64 dB reflection coefficient of 2.4 GHz and also maintains good radiation characteristics with a peak measuredain of 7.94 dB at its operating frequency. Therefore the proposed antenna model is more suitable for modern wireless
ommunications.
270 S. M. et al. / Journal of Electrical Systems and Information Technology 5 (2018) 263–270