In this study, inactivation kinetics of Geobacillus stearothermophilus spores were evaluated in different sterilization 
environments. The kinetics were analysed and mathematically modelled based on experimental data collected. 
The inactivation kinetics were measured precisely in moist heat environments using different sterilization 
temperatures and holding times. All measured inactivation times were shorter than the inactivation time indi-
cated by the Biological Indicator (BI) manufacturer. Increasing sterilization efficiency was found in the following 
environments: air, saturated steam, wet steam, liquid water, dialysis solutions. Applying first- and second-order 
reaction kinetics approaches, formulas were derived from measured data that enabled bacterial inactivation to be 
modelled. A mathematical first-order reaction kinetic modelling approach could be taken to effectively predict 
inactivation kinetics for G. stearothermophilus spores based on the experimentally measured data collected in wet 
steam and air environments. A second-order reaction kinetics approach could be taken, however, to model 
measured data more accurately in liquid water and dialysis-solution environments. The mathematical models 
presented here can be applied to describe inactivation kinetics for G. stearothermophilus spores in different 
sterilization test environments or for any given sterilization temperature profile. These findings can be used to 
improve the quality of sterilization processes.   
1. Introduction 
Medical devices and pharmaceuticals are typically subjected to 
sterilization processes to ensure patient safety [1–4]. A Sterility Assur-
ance Level (SAL) of 10− 6 is currently required for these processes, 
meaning that the device or product can contain no more than one viable 
microorganism per one million sterilized items, before these can come in 
contact with patients in order to ensure that the products are safe [5]. 
The term ‘sterilization processes’ refers to procedures used to inactivate 
microorganisms on both the surfaces and inside these items. 
Sterilization processes performed with moist heat (e.g. steam steril-
ization) are often used to sterilize medical devices and pharmaceuticals. 
Many studies have been carried out to investigate how efficiently these 
moist heat sterilization processes inactivate bacteria [6–9], while others 
have been performed to examine how effectively they sterilize specific 
products [10–14]. 
Specific investigations have been carried out under particular con-
ditions or on specific aspects of the sterilization process. For example, 
Mazzola et al. [15] determined the decimal reduction time (D-value) for 
chemical agents used in hospitals for disinfection purposes. Rodriguez 
et al. [16] developed a model that could be applied to predict bacterial 
inactivation under conditions of moist heat and high pressures and 
Geeraerd et al. [17] developed a free-ware tool that could be used to 
assess non-log-linear microbial survival curves. Van Doornmalen and 
Kopinga [18] investigated the temperature dependence of F-, D- and 
z-values in steam sterilization processes, while Hossain et al. [19] 
measured the inactivation of different types of bacteria in clinical solid 
waste using these same processes. Other authors studied the kinetics of 
bacterial spore inactivation at elevated temperatures [20–22]. 
All of these studies were performed to study bacterial inactivation 
processes under laboratory conditions, following special sterilization 
protocols in which the samples were heated and cooled occurred rapidly 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: manuel.feurhuber@fmc-ag.com (M. Feurhuber).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Physics in Medicine 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/physmed 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phmed.2021.100046 
Received 2 August 2021; Received in revised form 15 October 2021; Accepted 16 December 2021   
Physics in Medicine 13 (2022) 100046
2
(i.e. using resistometer vessels). According to ISO 11 138–3:2017 [23], 
the heating and cooling time in a resistometer should not exceed 10 s, 
but the heating and cooling times used in steam sterilizers in the in-
dustry are much longer (i.e. from several minutes up to a half hour). 
Another difference is that the steam in a resistometer is saturated. Steam 
saturation in other autoclaves can not be guaranteed by only measuring 
pressure and temperature [24,25]. Furthermore, in nearly all of these 
studies, bacterial inactivation was investigated with linear inactivation 
curves (e.g. first-order reaction kinetics) for one specific sterilization 
environment (e.g. saturated steam). The literature review conducted for 
the current study revealed two interesting gaps in knowledge: Although 
environments with dialysis solutions, liquid water, or wet steam are 
often used for sterilization purposes, little is known about the influence 
of these environments on bacterial inactivation. Furthermore, the 
inactivation curves that occur during the sterilization process in these 
environments are not precisely known. 
For this reason, the aim of this study was to determine the inacti-
vation curves for spores of the gram-positive bacterium 
G. stearothermophilus under real moist heat sterilization cycle conditions 
and in different sterilization environments. This organism was used 
because it is extremely resistant to moist sterilization processes [26,27] 
and, for that reason, it is commonly used in sterilization validation 
studies. However, the experimental values and inactivation kinetics 
cited in the literature [15,28–30] do not allow researchers to model the 
real inactivation kinetics for this organism, because measurements were 
usually made with resistometers under conditions of nearly saturated 
steam. Moreover, second-order reaction kinetics have apparently rarely 
ever been applied to model the inactivation kinetics. To address these 
gaps, in this work, we measured the inactivation of G. stearothermophilus 
in all sterilization environments that can be present inside a peritoneal 
dialysis bag system (PDBS) (steam, liquid water and different dialysis 
solutions) as well as in air. 
To investigate the inactivation kinetics, we used a commercially 
available steam autoclave to guarantee that all measurements were 
performed using typical scenarios and conditions for real-world sterili-
zation processes. These experimental measurements were used to 
mathematically model the bacterial inactivation processes based on the 
current norms and standards. To ensure significance of the modelling, 
the coefficient of determination (r2) must be 0.8 or higher (according to 
the ISO 11 138–7:2019 [31]). Therefore, the inactivation curves were 
not only modelled using first-order reaction kinetics – as has commonly 
been done [32] – but also using second-order reaction kinetics [33]. In 
this paper, we present and explain the complex mathematical models 
developed in this study. These enable other researchers to accurately 
model the inactivation of G. stearothermophilus spores in the investigated 
sterilization environments as well as for any sterilization temperature 
profile. In addition, the study findings provide us with a more thorough 
and clearer understanding of real bacterial spore inactivation kinetics 
that occur during sterilization processes. The presented kinetics can be 
applied by other researchers to further validate and optimize sterilizers 
and sterilization cycles. The authors of this study for example, imple-
mented the developed inactivation kinetics models to simulate the 
inactivation of G. stearothermophilus spores using Computational Fluid 
Dynamics (CFD) [13]. 
2. Methods 
2.1. Steam sterilizer 
All experiments in this study were performed with a commercially 
available steam sterilizer from Systec® with a volume of 162 L (Systec 
HX-150 [34], schematic sketch shown in Fig. 1), a sterilizer that is 
typically used in real-world laboratories. It has a cylindrical chamber 
(diameter: 500 mm, length: 750 mm) with two steam inlets which are 
located on the top of the chamber and the outlet, which is located on the 
bottom, near the door. The cooling water inlets are located between the 
two steam inlets. 
In all steam sterilization cycles carried out in this study, at least one 
external laboratory sensor (independent of the sterilizer’s pre-installed 
sensors) was fitted inside the chamber near the front (see Fig. 1). The 
fluid temperature inside the steam autoclave was measured with at least 
with two thermocouples, located at the top of the sterilization chamber 
and near the outlet (Fig. 1: T1 and T2). To measure the bacterial inac-
tivation kinetics in different sterilization environments, more pressure 
and temperature loggers were added to the measurement set-up. 
2.2. Modelling the bacterial inactivation based on sterilization parameters 
The inactivation of bacteria by steam sterilization follows an 
exponential decrease curve, which can be expressed using first-order 
inactivation kinetics [35]. Thus, the number of bacteria at any given 
time can be calculated as follows: 
N(t) = N0⋅e− kd(T)⋅t (1)  
where N(t) represents the number of currently active bacteria and kd(T), 
the inactivation rate of the bacteria, which is a function of the temper-
ature (T) and the sterilization environment. The temperature depen-
dence of the inactivation rate kd(T) is usually modelled using the 
Arrhenius equation (see Eq. (2)) [20]: 
kd(T) = kd0⋅e
− Ea
R⋅T(t) (2)  
Fig. 1. Schematic sketch of the steam autoclave with the locations of the steam and cooling water inlets, the outlet and the positions of the pressure sensor and the 
two thermocouples (T1 and T2) are shown. 
M. Feurhuber et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Physics in Medicine 13 (2022) 100046
3
where kd0 is a pre-exponential factor, Ed is the activation energy of the 
bacteria, R is the universal gas constant, and T(t) is the temperature at a 
given time t. 
Furthermore, the inactivation kinetics were also studied by taking a 
second-order reaction kinetic approach. The derived number of live or 
dead bacteria, depending on the time, is expressed as follows [36]: 
dN
dt
= kd(T)⋅N2 (3) 
Integrating Eq. (3) with N = N0 at t = t0 leads to: 
N(t) =
1
kd(T)⋅t + 1
N0
(4)  
where again N(t) represents the number of currently active bacteria and 
kd(T), the bacterial inactivation rate. The bacterial inactivation rate was 
also modelled here using the Arrhenius equation (see Eq. (2)). The kd(T) 
values used in the first-order reaction kinetic approach (see Eq. (1)) and 
the second-order reaction kinetic approach (see Eq. (4)) differ. 
2.3. D- and z-value 
To describe the temperature resistance of bacteria, the D- and 
z-values can be used. The D-value represents the time (in minutes) it 
takes to inactivate 90% of the bacteria at a given temperature (T) [15]. 
The higher the D-value, the higher the temperature resistance of the 
bacteria. The z-value describes the temperature dependence of the 
D-value; namely, it represents the temperature increase (in ◦C) which is 
needed to reduce the D-value by a factor of 10. 
To calculate the bacterial inactivation using a first-order reaction 
kinetics approach (see Eq. (1)), the inactivation rate kd(T) is needed. 
With Eq. (5), the inactivation rate for the Arrhenius equation can be 
calculated from the D-value of the bacteria. Jones [37] and Mann et al. 
[38] provide more detailed information about this equation. 
The kinetics of the inactivation shown in Eq. (5) are considered to be 
valid in any situation in which these kinetics follow the pattern of first- 
order kinetics (e.g. saturated steam sterilization). 
D(T) =
2.303
kd(T)
(5) 
In this study, we investigated bacterial inactivation kinetics in 
different sterilization environments that represent real operational 
conditions present in steam sterilizers. Therefore, the inactivation ki-
netics in liquid water and two dialysis solutions were also modelled 
using a second-order reactions kinetic approach (see Eq. (4)). With the 
inactivation kinetics based on first order (see Eq. (1)) or second order 
(see Eq. (4)) the number of the active bacteria can be calculated as a 
function of the sterilization time (N(t)). Due to comparison of the 
calculated time-dependent number of active bacteria (N(t)) with the 
measured number of active bacteria at given times (t), the coefficient of 
determination of the inactivation kinetics models can be calculated. 
It should be mentioned that Eq. (5), however, is not valid for use with 
the second-order reaction kinetics approach, because the D-value is 
based on first-order reaction kinetics. In the case of second-order re-
actions kinetics, the inactivation rate (kd(T)) has to be obtained using 
other methods. 
2.4. Description of the lethality of a steam sterilization process 
The FPhys value is used to describe the efficiency of a steam sterili-
zation process. This value is defined as the equivalent number of minutes 
that a device or product is exposed to a steam sterilization process 
(assuming saturated steam conditions), as compared to its exposure to a 
steam sterilization process at a constant reference temperature Tref. The 
higher the FPhys value, the higher the theoretical bacterial inactivation 
rate [28,39]. Eq. (6) is used to calculate the FPhys value for a given 
sterilization process (generally with saturated steam): 
FPhys =
∫ tn
t0
10
T(t)− Tref
z dt (6)  
where T(t) is the temperature at the time t, z is the z-value, and t0 and tn 
are the respective start and times for the sterilization process. Since all 
the bioindicators (BIs) used in this study were defined using a D-value at 
121.1 ◦C (established by the manufacturer), all FPhys values were 
calculated with reference to this temperature. The z-values used to 
calculate the FPhys values were set according to the z-value of the BIs. The 
authors are aware that the changes in the z-value during the sterilization 
process in different sterilization environments (e.g. liquid water, dialysis 
solutions, air) would have to be assumed. Nevertheless, the authors 
calculated the FPhys values for all the sterilization cycles performed in 
this study using the z-value provided by the BI’s manufacturer and the 
established manufacturer’s reference temperature of 121.1 ◦C. This 
assumption serves as base for the further development of inactivation 
kinetics. 
For reasons of comparability, the F0 value is also given for elected 
cycles in this study. The F0 value is a special form of the FPhys value and 
can also be used to describe the lethality of the investigated steam 
sterilization processes. The F0 value is calculated using a reference 
temperature of 121.1 ◦C and a z-value of 10 ◦C (Eq. (7)) [40]. 
F0 =
∫ tn
t0
10
T(t)− 121.1◦C
10 dt (7) 
A detailed description about the investigated sterilization cycles in 
this study can be found in Section 3.1. 
2.5. Biological Indicators 
Biological Indicators (BIs or spore strips) of G. stearothermophilus 
ATCC 7593 were obtained from SIMICON GmbH [41] and were in 
compliance with ISO 11 138–1:2017 [23] and ISO 11 138–3:2017 [42]. 
Each BI had a starting population of 2 ⋅ 106. All measurements in this 
study were performed using BIs from three different batches. The 
D-values and z-values of the spores differed between the batches. Table 1 
shows the D-value and the z-value of the different batches for the BIs 
used to obtain measurements in this study. The respective D-values and 
the z-values were taken from the manufacturer’s certificate and used as a 
basis for the comparison and evaluation of the results of the performed 
measurements. BIs from the three batches (see Table 1) were randomly 
used for all these measurements to investigate the inactivation kinetics 
in all specific sterilization environments. 
2.6. Preparation of the BIs for the measurements 
To evaluate the reaction kinetics in liquid water and the different 
dialysis solutions, the BIs were prepared for the test runs as follows: 
The BI strips were removed from the paper slips and placed in a semi- 
permeable cuprophane tube, which then was knotted on the two open 
sides to ensure that the solution could reach the BIs through the 
cuprophane membrane and, at the same time, that the BIs could not 
diffuse into the surrounding liquids. 
For the tests carried out in wet steam and air, the BI paper slips were 
placed directly into the sterilization environment. 
Table 1 
D- and z-values for the three batches of G. stearothermophilus BIs used for the 
measurements in this study.   
D-value at 121.1 ◦C [min] z-value [◦C] 
Batch 1 2.4 7 
Batch 2 2.3 8.1 
Batch 3 2.5 8.5  
M. Feurhuber et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Physics in Medicine 13 (2022) 100046
4
2.7. Counting the active bacteria on the BIs 
When counting colonies on plates, only values between 30 and 300 
colonies per plate are usually considered as statistically valid (in 
compliance with ISO 11 138–1:2017 [23]). The detailed counting pro-
cess of the active bacteria on the BIs is described in the supplementary 
material. Because the experiments were designed to show the inactiva-
tion kinetics of commercially available BIs, small CFU numbers – as low 
as 1 – also had to be assessed. The focus of the study was not to deter-
mine the influence of any carrier material of the bacterial spores on the 
inactivation kinetics. We evaluated smaller values than 30 colonies and 
added the corresponding error bars, enabling us to show the variation in 
the numbers of counted colonies and, therefore, the method’s level of 
inaccuracy. 
In this study, 5 up to 10 BIs were used for each measurement to 
investigate the inactivation kinetics of G. stearothermophilus. Error bars 
represent the maximum and minimum measured population numbers on 
the BIs used for the respective measurement. Therefore, the variation in 
the measured results is represented by the error bars; however, when the 
counts approached 0, the error bars enter far into the negative range due 
to the logarithmic scale used. For this reason, we chose not to display 
error bars below 10− 2. Conversely, the logarithmic representation of the 
Fig. 2. Measured temperature and calculated FPhys and F0 minutes of two investigated sterilization cycles with a FPhys minutes of (a) approximately 12.3 and (b) 
approximately 4.2. 
M. Feurhuber et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Physics in Medicine 13 (2022) 100046
5
error bars makes its upper end appear lower. 
The measured population values shown in the diagrams represent 
the mean value of the counted surviving bacteria on all BIs used in the 
respective measurement. Naturally, this included the possibility of a 
measured value below 1 (e.g. 8 BIs with 1 surviving bacteria and 2 BIs 
with 0 surviving bacteria). 
3. Measurement set-up 
3.1. Investigated steam sterilization cycles 
Different steam sterilization cycles were investigated to characterize 
the bacterial inactivation kinetics under real sterilization conditions. 
The following parameters were varied: the sterilization temperature, 
holding time of the sterilization temperature and environments (fluid). 
The goal was to measure the number of surviving bacteria for different 
FPhys minutes. To calculate the number of FPhys minutes, we considered 
the complete temperature profile, including the heating and the cooling 
phases of the sterilization cycles. Overall, 100 different steam steriliza-
tion cycles were investigated, with the FPhys minutes ranging from 0.01 
to over 500. This corresponded to a range from 0.01 to over 400 in F0 
minutes. Fig. 2 shows two examples of the investigated sterilization 
cycles. In the first sterilization example, a maximum sterilization tem-
perature of approximately 124 ◦C was reached, and a holding time of 
approximately 90 s was used. This sterilization cycle resulted in an FPhys 
of approximately 12.3 min (see Fig. 2(a)). The second sterilization 
example had a maximum sterilization temperature of approximately 
119 ◦C and a holding time of approximately 360 s. This sterilization 
cycle resulted in an FPhys of approximately 4.2 min (see Fig. 2(b)). All 
steam sterilization cycles were measured at least twice. The results of all 
measurements performed showed high reproducibility. 
3.2. Inactivation of bacteria in steam 
To measure the BI inactivation kinetics under real steam sterilization 
conditions (wet steam), the BIs were placed directly into the steam 
autoclave chamber. Eleven BIs were used for each measurement: Ten BI 
strips were placed into the steam autoclave, and one was taken as an 
untreated positive control. The pressure and temperature inside the 
autoclave were measured with external loggers in close proximity to the 
BIs. The loggers measured the pressure to an accuracy of ±30 mbar and 
the temperature to an accuracy of ±0.5 K. Due to the fact that only the 
pressure and the temperature of the steam was measured, it is possible 
that a very small amount of air is present as well [24]. 
The F0 minutes and the FPhys minutes of the steam sterilization cycle 
were calculated from the measured temperatures. The numbers of 
remaining viable bacteria were counted on all eleven BIs and then 
plotted against the FPhys minutes. The F0 minutes were used to provide 
an overview of the sterilization cycles investigated. 
3.3. Inactivation of bacteria in water 
To investigate the inactivation of the bacteria in water, a dialysis bag 
(Stay safe Balance®) with two compartments was filled with WFI. A 
schematic sketch of the measurement set-up is shown in Fig. 3. Each 
compartment had a volume of 1000 ml and the following dimensions: 
length = 240 mm, width = 80 mm and height = 55 mm. Five BIs were 
put into each compartment so that they were surrounded by water. Two 
temperature loggers were put into each compartment to measure the 
water temperature. One temperature logger measured the temperature 
in the compartment’s centre, and the other measured the temperature 
on the compartment’s outer surface (see green text and arrows in Fig. 3). 
After the sterilization process, the F0 minutes and the FPhys minutes were 
Fig. 3. Schematic sketch of (a) the top view and (b) the cross-section of dialysis bag system (Stay safe®) with the positions of the temperature loggers and the 
position of the BIs (spore strips) within the two compartments shown. This measurement set-up was used for liquid water as well as dialysis solution. 
M. Feurhuber et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Physics in Medicine 13 (2022) 100046
6
calculated using the average of the temperatures measured by these two 
loggers in each compartment. Differences between the temperatures 
measured by these two loggers were found to be below 0.5 K during the 
sterilization process. The number of surviving bacteria on each of the 
five BIs was counted. This measurement was later repeated with another 
sterilization cycle with different F0 minutes and FPhys minutes. 
3.4. Inactivation of bacteria in dialysis solution 
The inactivation rate of bacteria in the dialysis solution was assessed 
using a similar set-up as used for inactivation in water (see Fig. 3), but 
the compartments of the dialysis bag were filled with two different 
dialysis solutions instead of water. Compartment A was filled with so-
lution A, whereas compartment B was filled with solution B; these so-
lutions had different chemical properties. Solution A contained glucose 
and, therefore, possessed an acidic pH value of approximately 3, 
whereas solution B included lactate and had a basic pH value of 
approximately 8.5. Detailed information about the chemical composi-
tions of the two dialysis solutions is shown in Table 2. 
The bacterial inactivation in the dialysis solution was also measured 
for different sterilization cycles with different F0 and the FPhys minutes. 
After each sterilization cycle, the numbers of surviving bacteria on the 
BIs were measured, and, once again, the number of the surviving bac-
teria was plotted against the F0 and the FPhys minutes of the corre-
sponding sterilization cycle. 
3.5. Set-up to measure the bacterial inactivation in air 
The bacterial inactivation in air was measured using a metal 
container with a lid that could be opened to put in the measurement 
equipment (inner dimensions: 75 mm × 75 mm × 140 mm, inner vol-
ume: approx. 0.6 L). Before the sterilization process, the opened metal 
container was dried for 1 h in an oven at 105 ◦C to remove any surface 
moisture. Temperature and pressure loggers were placed inside the 
metal container (see Fig. 4). 
The ten BIs were hung with tape at regular intervals in the middle of 
the metal container. Afterwards, the gas-tight container was placed in-
side the steam sterilizer. Since no humidity was present inside the metal 
container at the beginning of the sterilization cycle, the pressure inside 
the container can be directly calculated from the measured temperature 
(isochoric change of state). Again, the measured temperature inside the 
metal container was used to calculate both the F0 minutes and the FPhys 
minutes of each investigated sterilization. 
4. Results 
4.1. Measured bacterial inactivation in steam 
Plotting the measurements taken to record the inactivation of 
G. stearothermophilus during different steam sterilization cycles yielded 
an exponential inactivation curve (see Fig. 5). Each measured point in 
Fig. 5 represents the mean number of viable bacteria after the sterili-
zation of 10 BIs. As already mentioned, the measured point could have a 
value of less than 1 (e.g. 5 BIs with 1 surviving bacteria and 5 BIs with 
0 surviving bacteria). The error bars in Fig. 5 represent the minimum 
and maximum numbers of surviving bacteria on the BIs used for this 
measurement. Overall, more than 200 BIs and 15 different sterilization 
cycles were measured, and the measurements were plotted to create this 
inactivation curve. Besides demonstrating that the inactivation follows 
an exponential decrease curve, the results show that a FPhys value of only 
approximately 10 min is needed to inactivate the initial number of 2 ⋅ 
106 bacteria. The black line in Fig. 5 represents the theoretically 
calculated bacterial inactivation, based on the average D-values and z- 
values of the BIs provided by the manufacturer (see Table 3). These 
results indicate that an FPhys value of approximately 15 min is needed to 
inactivate 2 ⋅ 106 bacteria. 
An inactivation curve based on a first-order reaction kinetic 
approach was obtained using the measured data for the bacterial inac-
tivation in wet steam (see dark green line in Fig. 5). The coefficient of 
determination (r2) exceeded 0.95. The obtained values from the 
measured inactivation curve for the pre-exponential factor (kd0), acti-
vation energy (Ea), as well as the inactivation rates at 100 ◦C and 121 ◦C 
(kd (100 ◦C)) and kd (100 ◦C)) are shown in Table 3. By entering the pre- 
exponential factor (kd0) and activation energy (Ea) into the Arrhenius 
equation (see Eq. (2) and then applying a first-order reaction kinetics 
approach (see Eq. (1), it is possible to accurately mathematically model 
the inactivation of G. stearothermophilus spores during the sterilization 
process in wet steam. Due to the high coefficient of determination using 
first-order reaction kinetics, we conclude that this approach is the most 
appropriate one. 
4.2. Measured bacterial inactivation in liquid water 
To measure the bacterial inactivation in liquid water, each 
compartment of the dialysis bag was filled with liquid water, five BIs and 
two temperature loggers (see Fig. 3). Each measured point shown in 
Fig. 6 represents the mean value of 5 BIs of active bacteria for one 
specific sterilization cycle. Again, the error bars represent the maximum 
and the minimum numbers of surviving bacteria found on these five BIs. 
Fig. 6 shows the measured inactivation of G. stearothermophilus by 
sterilization in liquid water, as well as the inactivation curves con-
structed based on first- and second-order reaction kinetics approaches, 
based on these measured data. The measured values show that the 
bacterial inactivation is strongly under-predicted in liquid water. In 
contrast to the manufacturer’s information, which indicates that 15 FPhys 
minutes are needed for inactivation (as measured in saturated steam), 
our experimental results indicate that only approximately 5 FPhys mi-
nutes are needed to inactivate 2 ⋅ 106 bacteria in liquid water. Fig. 6 
shows that the fit of the modelled first-order inactivation curve (depic-
ted as a dark blue line) is not as close to the measured data as the fit seen 
in the steam environment (see Fig. 5). The coefficient of determination 
(r2) of the first-order reaction kinetics was approximately 0.3. These 
results may be due to the fact that bacteria are inactivated at much lower 
temperatures in water environments than in wet and saturated steam 
environments. Measurements showed that approximately 1 log-ratio of 
bacteria can be inactivated merely by heating up the water to approxi-
mately 90 ◦C. At such low temperatures, hardly any FPhys minutes are 
generated. We also modelled the bacterial inactivation in liquid water 
by taking a second-order reaction kinetics approach (see light blue line 
in Fig. 5), since this approach is used to model many other chemical 
reactions in liquids [36]. The modelled second-order inactivation curve 
shows a much better coefficient of determination (r2 > 0.85) and, thus a 
better fit, to the measured points as compared to the fit achieved when 
modelling the inactivation using a first-order reaction kinetics curve. 
Therefore, the second-order reaction kinetics approach is considered the 
most appropriate and is in accordance with ISO 11 138–7:2019 [31], 
where an r2 > 0.8 for a reaction kinetic curve was applied. The pa-
rameters set to model the inactivation of G. stearothermophilus during the 
sterilization in a liquid water environment and using first-order reaction 
Table 2 
Chemical composition of the two investigated dialysis solutions (Solution A and 
Solution B).   
Solution A Solution B 
Na+ 195 mM 75 mM 
Lactate – 70 mM 
HCO−
3  – 5.0 mM 
Ca2+ 2.5 mM – 
Mg2+ 1.0 mM – 
Cl− 201 mM – 
Glucose 45.46 mM – 
pH value 2.8–3.1 8–8.8  
M. Feurhuber et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Physics in Medicine 13 (2022) 100046
7
Fig. 4. Schematic sketch of the metal box with the BIs (spore strips) and the pressure and temperature loggers used to measure the inactivation of the bacteria in 
air shown. 
Fig. 5. Measured populations, indicating the inactivation of G. stearothermophilus spores during steam sterilization, based on the number of bacteria calculated using 
a first-order reaction kinetic approach and the number of bacteria calculated according to the values provided by of the manufacturer. 
M. Feurhuber et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Physics in Medicine 13 (2022) 100046
8
kinetics (dark blue line in Fig. 6) are shown in Table 3, whereas the 
parameters set to model this inactivation using second-order reaction 
kinetics (see light blue line in Fig. 6) are shown in Table 4. 
4.3. Measured bacterial inactivation in dialysis solutions 
The inactivation of G. stearothermophilus in two different kinds of 
dialysis solutions was measured using the same procedure as described 
in previous sections. The two different dialysis solutions differed in their 
pH values and their chemical compositions (see Table 2). Results of the 
measured number of viable bacteria for dialysis solution A (pH value 
approximately 3) are shown in Fig. 7(a). At an FPhys value of approxi-
mately 3 min, 2 ⋅ 106 bacteria could already be inactivated. In this case, 
an FPhys of 3 min corresponds to an F0 of approximately 3.5 min. As in the 
case mentioned previously, the exponential inactivation curve (first- 
order reaction kinetics curve) (dark red line in Fig. 7(a)) does not fit the 
measured inactivation values for G. stearothermophilus adequately (r2 ≈
0.2). Therefore, the bacterial inactivation was again modelled using a 
second-order reaction kinetic approach (see orange line in Fig. 7(a)). 
This second-order reaction kinetic curve again showed a better fit with 
respect to the measured data (r2 ≈ 0.86). The parameter values used in 
the Arrhenius equations to calculate the bacterial inactivation in dialysis 
solution A, taking the first- and second-order approaches, can be found 
in Tables 3 and 4, respectively. 
Fig. 7(b) shows the measured and simulated numbers of viable 
bacteria in the sterilization experiments with dialysis solution B (pH 
value 8.5). The bacterial inactivation in this environment was faster 
than that seen with dialysis solution A. At an FPhys value of approxi-
mately 2.5 min (F0 value of approximately 3 min), 2 ⋅ 106 bacteria were 
inactivated. Again, the inactivation curve created by taking a second- 
order reaction kinetics approach (see yellow line in Fig. 7(b), r2 ≈
0.88) shows a better fit to the measured data, as compared to the fit seen 
when taking a first-order reaction kinetics approach (see dark yellow 
line in Fig. 7(b), r2 ≈ 0.15). The parameters used for the Arrhenius 
equations for the investigated inactivation kinetics in dialysis solution B 
are shown in Table 3 (first-order reaction kinetics) and Table 4 (second- 
order reaction kinetics). 
To calculate the number of active bacteria during the sterilization 
process in the two investigated dialysis solution environments by taking 
first-order or second-order reaction kinetics approaches, the pre- 
exponential factor (kd0), activation energy (Ea) shown in Tables 3 and 
4 must be substituted into the Arrhenius equation (Eq. (2))). Afterwards, 
the calculated inactivation rate (kd) must be substituted in Eq. (1) to 
calculate the inactivation based on first-order reaction kinetics and 
Table 3 
Obtained pre-exponential factor (kd0), activation energy (Ea) as well as the 
inactivation rates at 100 ◦C and 121 ◦C (kd (100 ◦C) and kd (121 ◦C)) to model the 
inactivation of G. stearothermophilus spores during the sterilization process in 
wet steam, liquid water and two dialysis solutions using a first-order reaction 
kinetics approach.   
kd0 [s− 1] Ea [J ⋅ 
mol− 1] 
kd (100 ◦C) 
[s− 1] 
kd (121 ◦C) 
[s− 1] 
Wet steam 1.018 42 ⋅ 
1048 
3.744 07 ⋅ 
105 
3.966 21 ⋅ 
10− 5 
2.458 74 ⋅ 
10− 2 
Liquid water 2.855 48 ⋅ 
1043 
3.375 94 ⋅ 
105 
1.486 05 ⋅ 
10− 4 
4.912 06 ⋅ 
10− 2 
Dialysis 
solution A 
(pH-value 3) 
5.170 04 ⋅ 
1043 
3.377 88 ⋅ 
105 
2.690 97 ⋅ 
10− 4 
8.889 49 ⋅ 
10− 2 
Dialysis 
solution B 
(pH-value 
8.5) 
6.831 82 ⋅ 
1043 
3.377 88 ⋅ 
105 
3.555 92 ⋅ 
10− 4 
1.175 39 ⋅ 
10− 1  
Fig. 6. Measured populations, indicating the inactivation of G. stearothermophilus spores during the sterilization in water, based on the number of bacteria calculated 
using a first-order reaction kinetic approach and the number of bacteria calculated using a second-order reaction kinetic approach. 
Table 4 
Obtained pre-exponential factor (kd0), activation energy (Ea) as well as the 
inactivation rates at 100 ◦C and 121 ◦C (kd (100 ◦C) and kd (121 ◦C)) to model the 
inactivation of G. stearothermophilus spores during the sterilization process in 
liquid water and two dialysis solutions using a second-order reaction kinetics 
approach.   
kd0 [s− 1] Ea [J ⋅ 
mol− 1] 
kd (100 ◦C) 
[s− 1] 
kd (121 ◦C) 
[s− 1] 
Liquid water 7.312 93 ⋅ 10 
166 
1.272 86 ⋅ 
106 
7.922 79 ⋅ 
10− 12 
2.402 78 ⋅ 
10− 2 
Dialysis 
solution A 
(pH-value 3) 
2.246 71 ⋅ 10 
154 
1.173 06 ⋅ 
106 
1.401 01 ⋅ 
10− 10 
7.855 09 ⋅ 
10− 2 
Dialysis 
solution B 
(pH-value 
8.5) 
1.368 54 ⋅ 10 
154 
1.168 67 ⋅ 
106 
3.518 87 ⋅ 
10− 10 
1.829 50 ⋅ 
10− 1  
M. Feurhuber et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Physics in Medicine 13 (2022) 100046
9
respectively in Eq. (4) to calculate it using second-order reaction 
kinetics. 
4.4. Measured bacterial inactivation in air 
Inactivation of G. stearothermophilus in air was measured in a metal 
container (see Fig. 4). Fig. 8(b) shows the exponential decrease curve 
(first-order reaction kinetics) of the bacteria for the sterilization exper-
iments in air. The modelled first-order reaction kinetic curve fit closely 
with the measured values (r2 > 0.95). As one can see, very high FPhys 
values are needed to inactivate all 2 ⋅ 106 bacteria spores of 
G. stearothermophilus in the air environment. 
4.5. Comparison of the measured inactivation kinetics 
In Fig. 8, we compare all the first-order inactivation curves created 
from measurements taken in the different sterilization environments. 
The inactivation of 2 ⋅ 106 G. stearothermophilus spores took 2.5 FPhys 
minutes in solution B, 3 FPhys minutes in solution A, 5 FPhys minutes in 
liquid water, 10 FPhys minutes in the measured wet steam and 15 FPhys 
minutes according to the BI manufacturer (as measured in saturated 
steam, see Fig. 8(b)). The inactivation rate of G. stearothermophilus 
measured in air is completely different from the rate measured in wet 
environments, as is commonly known. At the investigated temperature 
levels (approx. 115–130 ◦C), it is hardly impossible to inactivate a suf-
ficiently large number of G. stearothermophilus spores within a few hours. 
Fig. 7. Measured populations, indicating the inactivation of G. stearothermophilus spores during the sterilization process in (a) dialysis solution A (pH value 3) and (b) 
dialysis solution A (pH value 8.5), based on the number of active bacteria calculated using a first-order reaction kinetic approach and the number of active bacteria 
calculated using a second-order reaction kinetic approach. 
M. Feurhuber et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Physics in Medicine 13 (2022) 100046
10
To inactivate Geobacillus stearothermophilus spores in air, temperatures 
of over 160 ◦C are needed to achieve the same number of viable bacteria 
achieved when using steam sterilization at approximately 121 ◦C [29, 
43]. 
5. Discussion and conclusion 
In this study, we assessed the inactivation kinetics of 
G. stearothermophilus spores in environments containing wet steam, air, 
liquid water and dialysis solutions. We mathematically described the 
inactivation kinetics by taking first- and second-order reaction kinetics 
approaches. If we carefully examine the sterilization process, the reason 
taking these approaches to analyse these inactivation kinetics becomes 
clearer. 
Our results show that maintaining wet conditions during the steril-
ization process inside a real steam sterilizer more efficiently inactivates 
bacteria than sterilizing the samples in a resistometer and exposing them 
to a saturated steam environment. Steam saturation inside a resis-
tometer can be verified by additional measurements, but not only by 
measuring pressure and temperate [24]. In our experimental set-up, we 
observed a large amount of condensation on all the inner walls and trays 
in the steam sterilizer. In a resistometer, the amount of condensation is 
significantly lower. In our set-up, some of this condensation was partly 
absorbed by the BIs and led to more rapid inactivation. Similar results 
were found in previous studies [13,44,45]. Consequently, the amount of 
moisture absorbed by the BIs is primarily responsible for the differences 
seen between the inactivation curve constructed on the basis of the 
manufacturer’s information and the curve based on values measured in 
this study (10 measured FPhys minutes found in our experiments as 
compared to 15 FPhys minutes according to the manufacturer’s infor-
mation, see Fig. 5). A minor part of this difference is caused by the fact 
that we calculated an equivalent sterilization time (FPhys minutes) as 
compared to the real sterilization time measured in a resistometer. 
Overall, our results show that wet steam reduces the D-value to 
approximately 1.6 min, which is nearly 0.8 min less than the D-value 
measured by the BI’s manufacturer (saturated steam in a resistometer). 
Furthermore, applying the developed formula (based on first-order re-
action kinetics), we can mathematically model the bacterial inactivation 
during the sterilization in wet steam with a high accuracy (r2 ≈ 0.95). 
Square values of more than 0.8 show sufficient accuracy to be consid-
ered valid (according to the ISO 11 138–7:2019 [31]). Similar results 
were cited by Brown [46] and Z. Tang [47]. 
Our experimental series in liquid water showed that this environ-
ment is highly effective for bacterial inactivation. Only 5 FPhys minutes 
Fig. 8. Measured inactivation of Geobacillus stearothermophilus during the sterilization in (a) all atmospheres except air and (b) in all atmospheres including air.  
M. Feurhuber et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
Physics in Medicine 13 (2022) 100046
11
were required to inactivate 2 ⋅ 106 bacterial spores of 
G. stearothermophilus in liquid water. This is at least 3 times faster than 
the period indicated by the manufacturer (as measured in a resistometer 
under nearly saturated steam conditions). The authors are aware that, in 
this case, steam sterilization by direct contact [48] was compared with 
the indirect sterilization of liquids [27]. It was necessary to assume that 
the z-values remain the same in all investigated sterilization environ-
ments in order to mathematically model the inactivation curves, and it is 
clear that the sterilization environment influences the z-value. For 
example, increasing the z-value results in shorter inactivation times (i.e. 
FPhys minutes) at temperatures above 121.1 ◦C and to longer inactivation 
times (i.e. higher FPhys minutes) at temperatures below 121.1 ◦C. 
Decreasing the z-value has the opposite influence on the FPhys minutes. 
Nevertheless, without making this assumption, it would not have been 
possible to directly compare the inactivation curves based on measure-
ments made in different sterilization environments. We took additional 
measurements to confirm our initial observations and could show that 
the bacterial inactivation in liquid water also begins to take place at 
lower temperatures (approximately 90 ◦C) where hardly any FPhys mi-
nutes are generated. We expect that the bacterial strain used on the BIs 
in a validated test has a widely homogenous heat susceptibility. 
Therefore, these additional results underline and support the results 
presented in this study, i.e. that the use of a liquid water environment 
(liquid fluids) in the sterilization process is highly efficient for bacterial 
inactivation. In any case, the results presented in Fig. 6 show that the 
measured inactivation curve follows a second-order reaction kinetics for 
the inactivation of G. stearothermophilus in liquid water (r2 > 0.85). A 
non-linear bacterial inactivation curve was also found in the in-
vestigations of Hiatt [49] and Xiao et al. [50] for different sterilization 
environments. These results lead us to generally conclude that the 
inactivation curve created by taking a second-order reaction kinetics 
approach describes the sterilization process accurately. Nevertheless, 
due to the asymptotic course of the curve, over 530 FPhys minutes would 
be needed to reach a Sterility Assurance Level (SAL) of 10− 6. This 
exorbitantly high number of FPhys minutes can obviously not describe the 
real behaviour during the sterilization process. According to the 
first-order reaction kinetics curve, approximately 9 FPhys minutes would 
be needed to reach an SAL of 10− 6. All measurements made in this study 
indicate that this value is much more accurate. To investigate the phe-
nomena of the asymptotic course of the curve in more detail, it would be 
necessary to make many additional measurements, since microbiolog-
ical evaluations of colonies below 30 CFU are not considered statistically 
valid. Therefore, this topic exceeds the scope of the current study but 
could be addressed in a future study. 
Overall, the sterilization process in a dialysis solution represents a 
‘best case’ scenario for bacterial inactivation. Sterilization in dialysis 
solution was significantly faster as compared to water (3 FPhys minutes 
for solution A and 2.5 FPhys minutes for solution B vs. 5 FPhys minutes in 
water, see Fig. 7 vs Fig. 6). We assume that the pH value is the most 
important factor, ensuring the more rapid inactivation of the bacterial 
spores in the dialysis solution [51,52]. In addition, it may be that the ion 
concentration is crucial for a more rapid inactivation of bacterial spores 
[53]. The underlying mechanism is outside the scope of our study. 
As in water, the inactivation curves modelled with the second-order 
reaction kinetics approach fit the measured points more accurately than 
the exponential decrease curve (first-order reaction kinetics approach). 
We also found that the reaction kinetics curves created by taking the 
second-order kinetics approach more accurately reflect the curves based 
on the measured values for the two investigated dialysis solutions. 
Nevertheless, exorbitantly high values (over 130) of FPhys minutes would 
also be needed in the dialysis solutions to achieve a SAL of 10− 6. The 
same problem occurs: The decease curve can no longer be adequately 
measured in the asymptotic region. This practice was justified because 
no active bacteria were found in the dialysis solutions during the study 
of PDBS. After a sterilization with 30 FPhys minutes no viable bacteria 
were ever found. This suggests that the inactivation curve in the 
asymptotic region has a completely different cause and, therefore, must 
be further investigated in the future. 
Sterilization in air took much longer than sterilization in all other 
investigated fluids. As a result, the sterilization in air represents the 
‘worst case‘ scenario due to the significantly slower bacterial inactiva-
tion in the air as compared to the measured bacterial inactivation in the 
wet steam environment (see the more than 600 FPhys minutes shown in 
Fig. 8(b) for air vs. the 10 FPhys minutes shown in Fig. 5 for wet steam). 
Our findings re-emphasize the well-known fact that sterilization in pure 
air (i.e. without any moisture) is not successful. Nevertheless, the 
modelled inactivation curve (first-order) can be used to predict the 
inactivation of G. stearothermophilus during sterilization in air with high 
accuracy. 
The results presented in this study allow us to reach several con-
clusions. It is possible to mathematically model the inactivation of 
G. stearothermophilus during the sterilization process in different envi-
ronments (steam, liquid water, dialysis solution and air) with high ac-
curacy. Researchers and developers of sterilization processes can use the 
information presented in this paper to model the inactivation of 
G. stearothermophilus for any temperature profile for a sterilization 
process using the investigated sterilization environments. Furthermore, 
these results may help to improve the overall efficiency of the sterili-
zation processes. 
Further studies on the inactivation of G. stearothermophilus spores 
could include making additional measurements with more measured 
data and in other sterilization environments. The inactivation kinetics 
presented here may be fruitfully applied to numerically simulate the 
inactivation of G. stearothermophilus spores as a function of the local 
temperature and the local sterilization environment using CFD [54–58]. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors want to thank the microbiological department of Fre-
senius Medical Care in St. Wendel for all the support during the mea-
surements of the inactivation of Geobacillus stearothermophilus. 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.phmed.2021.100046.