Strong laser radiation, with intensity over 1020 W/cm2, can
nowadays be used to produce bright X/g-ray radiation through
the interaction with high-Z solid. The bright X/g-ray radiation
sources have many applications in several research areas
[1e4]. For example, the bright X-ray burst can be used for
high sensitivity imaging by Thomson scattering. Such g-ray
sources can also be used to the transmutation of nuclear waste
through the (g, n) reactions [5,6]. In addition, ultra bright g-* Corresponding author. State Key Laboratory of High Field Laser Physics,
Shanghai Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, 201800 Shanghai, China.
E-mail address: wudong@siom.ac.cn (D. Wu).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mre.2018.06.002
2468-080X/© 2018 Science and Technology Information Center, China Academy
access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licensray sources may help developing future geg colliders [7],
which are of fundamental importance for basic sciences.
When an intense laser beam irradiates a solid composed of
high-Z materials, relativistic electrons can be produced in
front of the target through the direct-laser-heating/acceleration
mechanism [8e14]. These energetic electrons then propagate
through the bulk solid and may trigger efficient bremsstrah-
lung emission. For a complete description of this electron
transport and bremsstrahlung, different atomic and plasma
processes need to be taken into account including ionization
dynamics [15,16], collision dynamics [17e19], Ohm heating
[20], as well as self-generated electromagnetic fields [21,22].
Until now, however, there is no comprehensive simulation
model that can incorporate all the related physical processes.of Engineering Physics. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. This is an open
es/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
294 D. Wu et al. / Matter and Radiation at Extremes 3 (2018) 293e299Recently, we have developed a particle-in-cell (PIC) code,
which enables us to calculate coupled atomic and plasma
processes in a more realistic way. Indeed this PIC code pro-
vides us a good opportunity to investigate the X/g-ray radia-
tion of solid when irradiated by intense laser pulses. The PIC
code takes advantage of the recently developed ionization [15]
and collision [17] dynamics models. Within the simulations,
the ionization charge state and conductivity (or resistivity) of
target material evolve according to the local plasma and
electromagnetic fields conditions. Therefore, different types of
materials, like copper (Cu), gold (Au) and plastics, can be
modelled based on their intrinsic atomic properties.
Bremsstrahlung is known as the dominant process in solids
under intense laser irradiation, which typically results in a
continuous and broad spectra. Although Ka and Kb emission
might also appear in the radiation spectra, they are typically
weak and of low frequencies when compared with brems-
strahlung radiation, especially when the laser intensity is over
1020 W/cm2 [23]. By varying the target materials and laser
intensities moreover, we can tune the energetic electrons'
generation in front of the target and transport within the target.
The “generation” and “transport” of electrons would act as a
whole and finally influence the bremsstrahlung X/g-ray
emission. For laser intensities higher than 1023 W/cm2,
moreover, laser-plasma non-linearity, including the nonlinear
Compton scatterings and radiation reactions effects [24,25],
are predicted to appear. Such non-linear effects occur when
relativistic electrons, quivering in the ultra intense electro-
magnetic fields, emit high frequency photons. Under such
extreme conditions, the X/g-rays from nonlinear Compton
scatterings can become comparable to the bremsstrahlung ra-
diation [26]. Furthermore, the radiation reaction effects of
electrons can significantly influence the energetic electrons'
generation in front of the target and even the following
transport. Little is known, so far, about the bremsstrahlung
radiation and nonlinear Compton scatterings at extreme laser
irradiations, and how they need to be incorporated in order to
model the total radiation of solid is still open. Therefore, a
quantitative evaluation of radiation characteristics of different
high-Z solids irradiated by intense laser pulses would be of
significant importance for both basic science and engineering
applications.
In this paper, the characteristics of X/g-ray radiations by
intense laser interactions with high-Z solids are investigated
through particle-in-cell simulations. Within the simulations,
both bremsstrahlung and nonlinear Compton scatterings have
been included. In particular, we here have studied the relative
strength and angular distributions of X/g-ray productions from
bremsstrahlung and nonlinear Compton scatterings. The
threshold under which the nonlinear Compton scatterings
become dominant is also outlined.
The paper is organized as follows. Our models concerning
bremsstrahlung and nonlinear Compton scatterings are intro-
duced in Sec. 2. In Sec. 3, PIC simulations concerning Cu and
Au materials with laser of intensities varying from 1020 W/cm2
to 1024 W/cm2 are performed. The relative strength and
angular distributions of X/g-ray productions frombremsstrahlung and nonlinear Compton scatterings under
different materials and laser irradiations are also compared in
Sec. 3. Summary and discussion are given in Sec. 4.
2. Theoretical model
When two charged particles collide, they will accelerate in
each other's electric field and as a result, emit electromagnetic
waves. This kind of phenomenon is typically called brems-
strahlung radiation. Generally, the bremsstrahlung radiation
power by an accelerated charge increases with _b
2
Z2. This
value is significantly determined by acceleration _b and target
atomic number Z. For different target materials, atomic num-
ber Z is changed accordingly. From the relation, P  _b
2
Z2, it
is apparent that high-Z material would be more preferable in
X/g-ray production. The energetic electrons produced in front
of the target are mainly due to direct-laser acceleration
mechanism. At extreme intensities, laser-plasma interactions
become strongly nonlinear, where new and exotic phenomena
are predicted to appear. Among the features of interest at this
exotic quantum electro-dynamical regime are the so-called
nonlinear Compton scatterings and the accompanied radia-
tion reaction friction effects. They occur when relativistic
electrons, quivering in the ultra intense electromagnetic fields,
emit high frequency photons. In this section, we will give a
brief introduction of the bremsstrahlung and nonlinear
Compton scattering models used in our PIC simulations.
If we consider the energetic electron, for example Ek
greater than MeV, projects into a high-Z solid, the brems-
strahlung radiation would become non-ignorable. Following
the classical text by Jackson [27], we can obtain the energy
radiated per unit length per unit frequency as,
d2E
dldðZuÞ ¼
16
3
ar2enA
2 ln
2gg
0mec
2
Zu
 ð1Þ
where n is the ion density of the target, A is the atomic number
of the target material, a ¼ e2=Zc is fine structure constant,
re ¼ e2/mec
2 is classical electron radius and g0 ¼ g Zu is the
relativistic factor of the electron after the photon has been
emitted. For energetic electrons, the radiation is emitted
mainly in the forward direction, under the average angle  1=
g between the directions of motion of the electron and the
emitted light. In PIC simulations, therefore, the angular dis-
tribution of emitted photons can be approximated as
dE
dUdðZuÞ ¼
4
3p
d

1 p
jpj

acr2enA
2 ln
2gg
0mec
2
Zu
dt; ð2Þ
where a delta-function approximation is used in order to
describe the direction of photon emissions.
In PIC simulations, as the average angle between photon
and electron can be handled by a delta-function approxima-
tion, the Bremsstrahlung radiation do not further change the
deflection of the electron. This approximation will signifi-
cantly simplify the implementation of Bremsstrahlung
correction into the binary collision models. In such model,
295D. Wu et al. / Matter and Radiation at Extremes 3 (2018) 293e299after the ordinary binary collision calculations, the electron
energy is further updated by including the Bremsstrahlung
correction, i.e., gn ¼ g dg with dg representing the energy
loss within collisions. The electron momentum is also updated
with pn ¼ ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiðgn  1Þ=ðg 1Þp
p, where dt is the time step of
PIC simulations.
When an electron encounters strong electromagnetic fields,
it can emit high frequency photons. This is called nonlinear
Compton scatterings. In the meanwhile, this electron will lose
much of its kinetic energy by radiation, and to which one
usually refers as radiation reaction effects. In order to resolve
this interaction, here, in our model [24,25,28], electrons are
assumed to move in two separate fields: the original Lorenz
field and its own radiated fields, as following,
dp
dt
¼ fL þ

e
c
ðduBÞ  ug2
c2
ðdu,fLÞ

; ð3Þ
where fL is the Lorenz force, u ¼ p=
ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi
m2 þ p2=c2
p
, and du ¼
t
m
fLuðu,fLÞ=c2
1þtðu,fLÞ=mc2, in which t is a constant expressed as t ¼
2e2=3mc3. Again, the radiation direction is confined in a
narrow angle 1=g along the electron trajectory. In the highly
relativistic case, it can also be approximated with the delta-
function. The frequency spectrum can simply express as
dI
dUdu
dt ¼ d

U p
jpj

g2ðdu,fLÞ
uc
FðrÞdt; ð4Þ
with FðrÞ ¼ 35=2
8p r
R∞
r K5=3ðxÞdx, where K5=3 is the modified
Bessel function, r ¼ u/uc, and uc ¼ 3urg
3/2 is momentarily
close to that from circular motion with a rotation frequency
ur ¼ jp fLj=p2.
Note that we have already implemented both bremsstrah-
lung and nonlinear Compton scatterings [25] into a PIC code
[29]. When coupled with the ionization dynamics [15], colli-
sion dynamics [17], Ohm heating [20] as well as self-
generated electromagnetic fields [21,22], the radiation prop-
erties of a high-Z solid under the irradiations of intense lasers
can therefore also be calculated quantitatively.
3. Simulation results
We have performed a series of 2D PIC simulations to
investigate the emitted spectra of Cu and Au targets, when
irradiated by intense laser beams with intensities varying from
1020 W/cm2 to 1024 W/cm2. Here, Cu (density of 8.9 g/cm3)
and Au (density of 19.32 g/cm3) targets with the same thick-
ness 2 mm are used to analyse the effects of target material on
radiation properties. The initial temperature of Cu and Au
solid is chosen to be 0.01 eV. The initial ionization degrees of
Cu and Au are Z ¼ 4 and 5, respectively. We here take
advantage of the recently developed ionization and collision
dynamics models, which help calculate the ionization charge
state and conductivity of target quite precisely according to the
local plasma and electromagnetic fields conditions within the
simulations. The simulations were carried out in the X-Y
Cartesian geometry with laser propagation in the X direction.The size of the simulation box is chosen to be X (8 mm)  Y
(20 mm), which is divided into 400  1000 uniform grids. The
laser pulse has a predefined profile of form
er2=r20 sin2ðpt=2t0Þ, with r0 ¼ 3l0, t0 ¼ 10T0 where T0 is the
laser cycle. The central wavelength of the laser is 1 mm. The
laser pulse is normally incident on the target. In the X and Y
directions, absorbing boundary conditions are applied for both
particles and laser field. In order to quantitatively evaluate the
radiation contributions from bremsstrahlung and nonlinear
Compton scatterings, two separate simulation groups are
performed: (a) taking into account the bremsstrahlung radia-
tion only; (b) taking into account both bremsstrahlung radia-
tion and nonlinear Compton scatterings.
Fig. 1 (a)e(c) shows the electron density profiles of Cu
targets when irradiated by a laser pulse with intensity 1020 W/
cm2, 1023 W/cm2 and 1024 W/cm2, respectively. Here, snap-
shots of these densities are taken at the end of the laser pulses.
Within these simulations (Fig. 1 (a)e(c)), only bremsstrahlung
radiations are taken into account. In contrast, Fig. 1 (d)e(f) are
the results when both bremsstrahlung and nonlinear Compton
scatterings are involved. Fig. 2 shows that same for analogue
parameters, but the Au targets are used instead of Cu. As seen
from Fig. 1 (a), the laser beams cannot penetrate through the
target with a laser of intensity 1020 W/cm2, which are reflected
back when reaching the critical density surfaces. The ioniza-
tion channel inside the target is induced by energetic electrons,
which are typically generated at the critical density surfaces
and then propagate forward. From Figs. 1(a) and 2(a), we can
see that the transport of energetic electrons is well guided
inside both Cu and Au targets. The guiding of energetic
electrons is proved to be the action of resistive magnetic fields
[20e22], which are induced by Faraday's law vB=vt ¼ V
E and Ohm's law E ¼ hJe, where h is the resistivity of the
bulk target and Je is the current density of slow moving
backward electrons. The resistive magnetic fields will trend to
collimate energetic electrons. This collimation counteracts the
dispersion of electrons by collisions and other effects, like
Weible and two-stream instabilities [30,31], within the trans-
port. To evaluate the contribution of radiation reactions to
electron dynamics, for intensity of 1020 W/cm2, no significant
contributions from radiation reactions have been seen from
Figs. 1 and 2. These effects start to rise when laser intensity is
increasing. When laser intensity reaches 1024 W/cm2, the light
pressure can penetrate through the whole solid target as in the
hole-boring [32,33] regime. As seen from the comparison of
Fig. 1 (c) and (f), the radiation reaction effects trend to prevent
the target from breaking through.
In Fig. 3, we have summarized the totally emitted energy as
a function of incident laser intensities. In general, the total
emission energy increases monotonically with the laser in-
tensity. For a Cu target, Fig. 3 (a) compares this total energy
for two computations with and without nonlinear Compton
scatterings. We can see that the contributions from nonlinear
Compton scatterings appearing when laser intensities are
larger than 1023 W/cm2. At 1024 W/cm2, nonlinear Compton
scatterings can even become dominant over bremsstrahlung
radiation. In contrast, in Fig. 3 (b), also at the laser intensity
Fig. 1. The electron density profiles of copper (Cu) target when irradiated by intense laser pulses. The snapshots are taken at the end of laser pulses. (a)e(c) are the
cases with laser of intensity 1020 W/cm2, 1023 W/cm2 and 1024 W/cm2 if only the bremsstrahlung is included. (d)e(f) are the corresponding cases taken into
account both bremsstrahlung and radiation reactions.
10 10 10
10 1010
5 5 5
5 55
0 0 0
0 00
5 5 5
5 55
10 10 10
10 1010
y
μ
)
m
(
x μ )m(
x μ )m(
x μ )m(
x μ )m(
x μ )m(
x μ )m(
y
μ
)
m
(
y
μ
)
m
(
y
μ
)
m
(
y
μ
)
m
(
y
μ
)
m
(
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
4
4
4
4
4
6
6
6
6
6
6
8
8
8
8
8
8
10 W/cm20 2
10 W/cm23 2 10 W/cm24 2
w/o RR
with Br.
w/o RR
with Br.
w/o RR
with Br.
with RR
with Br.
with RR
with Br.
with RR
with Br.
Density( )nc Density( )nc Density( )nc
Density( )nc Density( )nc Density( )nc
1000 6000 8000
1000 6000 8000
500 3000 4000
500 3000 4000
0 0 0
0 0 0
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)
Fig. 2. The electron density profiles of gold (Au) target when irradiated by intense laser pulses. The snapshots are taken at the end of laser pulses. (a)e(c) are the
cases with laser of intensity 1020 W/cm2, 1023 W/cm2 and 1024 W/cm2 if only the bremsstrahlung is included. (def) are the corresponding cases when taken into
account both bremsstrahlung and radiation reactions.
296 D. Wu et al. / Matter and Radiation at Extremes 3 (2018) 293e2991024 W/cm2, emitted energy from Au targets are presented.
Even though the nonlinear Compton scattering plays important
roles in the total radiations, it is still not dominant over
bremsstrahlung. To be more specific, under laser irradiations
with intensity 1024 W/cm2, the total emitted energy from Cu
targets when taking into account nonlinear Compton scatter-
ings is increased from 0.3 unit to 0.7 unit. The net contribution
from nonlinear Compton scatterings is 0.4 unit. While for the
Au cases, it is increased from 0.8 unit to 0.9 unit. Here, the net
contribution from nonlinear Compton scatterings is only 0.1
unit. Let us recall here that at laser intensity of 1024 W/cm2,
the Cu target is close to be broken through, while this is not at
all the case for Au target. We can therefore conclude empiri-
cally the condition under which nonlinear Compton scatterings
become dominant over bremsstrahlungethe laser intensityshould be higher than 1023 W/cm2 and simultaneously the
laser beam should break through the target.
Fig. 4 displays the radiation spectra of Cu and Au targets
when irradiated by intense laser beams with varying in-
tensities. Here, dashed lines refer to the spectra in which only
the bremsstrahlung is taken into account and show a broad
distribution from 0 to a cut-off frequency. The cut-off fre-
quency of bremsstrahlung is exactly the maximum kinetic
energy of colliding electrons. While the radiation from
nonlinear Compton scatterings are well peaked. The total ra-
diation spectra are shown by solid lines, which taking into
account both bremsstrahlung radiations and nonlinear Comp-
ton scatterings. As seen from Fig. 4 (a), at the laser intensity of
1023 W/cm2, the peak spectra are relatively small compared
with the broad bremsstrahlung spectra. While at laser intensity
Fig. 3. The total energy of emitted photons as a function of laser intensities for
(a) a copper and (b) gold target, respectively. Results are compared for only the
bremsstrahlung (dashed line) and both the bremsstrahlung and nonlinear
Compton scatterings (solid line) are taken into account.
Fig. 4. The photon spectrum emitted from (a) Cu and (b) Au targets when
irradiated by intense laser pulses with varying laser intensities. Here black
lines correspond to laser intensity 1023 W/cm2, and red lines are the cases of
1024 W/cm2. While the dashed lines refer to simulations only taking into
account the bremsstrahlung, and the solid lines describe simulations taking
into account both the bremsstrahlung and nonlinear Compton scattering. Here,
1u0 ¼ 1.24 eV.
Fig. 5. The angular distribution of the emitted photons from (a) Cu and (b) Au
targets irradiated by intense laser pulses with varying laser intensities. Here
black lines correspond to laser intensity 1023 W/cm2, red lines are the cases of
1024 W/cm2 and blue lines are the cases of 1020 W/cm2. The dashed and solid
lines refer to the same computational model as in Fig. 4. For laser intensity
1020 W/cm2, as the contribution of nonlinear Compton scattering is extremely
small, the dashed and solid lines are merged as single solid lines. The inset of
(b) is the magnified comparison when including and excluding nonlinear
Compton scatterings, for laser intensity 1023 W/cm2.
297D. Wu et al. / Matter and Radiation at Extremes 3 (2018) 293e2991024 W/cm2, the peak spectra is significantly dominant over
the broad bremsstrahlung spectra. This behaviour is similar to
the emitted radiation shown in Fig. 3. In contrast, in Fig. 4 (b),
even at laser intensity 1024 W/cm2, the contributions fromnonlinear Compton scatterings is still not dominant over
bremsstrahlung radiations. This is because, as shown in Fig. 2
(f), under these conditions, the Au target is not broken
through.
Finally, Fig. 5 presents the angular distributions of emitted
photons, where f is defined as the angle between the X-axis
and the photon propagation direction. Data from Cu and Au
targets are shown in Fig. 5 (a) and (b), respectively. At laser
intensity 1020 W/cm2, the emission angular distributions of Cu
shows two peaks, as seen from the blue line in Fig. 5 (a). One
is located at 10, the other at 160. From these peaks, we find
that most of the radiation is in the forward direction. The
backward emission is due to the reflux of energetic electrons,
which are drawn back by the sheath fields on the backside of
the targets. The pretty good collimation of radiation can also
be well explained by the guiding of resistive magnetic fields,
as shown in Fig. 1 (a), where the photon and electron propa-
gation directions almost coincide. In contrast, as shown in
Fig. 5 (b), also under laser irradiation intensity 1020 W/cm2, no
significant collimation of radiation is found for Au targets.
When referring to Fig. 2 (a), we find the reason. Although the
resistive magnetic fields also play roles in the transport pro-
cesses, in the Au cases, it is several times higher. This is
because the resistive magnetic field is significantly determined
by resistivity, which is proportional to the average charge state
Z. A large resistive magnetic field will first collimate the
298 D. Wu et al. / Matter and Radiation at Extremes 3 (2018) 293e299energetic electrons and later diverge them. These two counter-
interacting effects will finally lead to larger emission angles.
When laser intensity becomes higher, the angular distributions
of emitted photons become much complicated. Even though,
we still notice some quantitative features of angular distribu-
tions from bremsstrahlung and nonlinear Compton scatterings.
From the comparison of the solid red line and dashed red line
in Fig. 5 (a), we therefore see the direction of bremsstrahlung
radiation to be forward, while the direction of nonlinear
Compton scatterings to be along the laser polarization di-
rections, i.e. 90.
4. Discussion and conclusions
Note that when the laser pulses are obliquely incident to
solid targets [34], the interaction will present further
complexity. Although such cases are closely related to real
experiments, they are, at present, out of the contents of this
work, and might be addressed somewhere else in the near
future.
To summarize, characteristics of X/g-ray radiations by
intense laser interactions with high-Z solids have been inves-
tigated by means of our recently developed PIC simulation
code. This PIC code takes advantage of the newly developed
ionization and collision dynamics models. Within the simu-
lations, the ionization charge state and conductivity of target
can therefore evolve quite precisely according to the local
plasma and electromagnetic fields conditions. Different types
of materials can be modelled due to their intrinsic atomic
properties. Along with ionization and collision dynamics,
bremsstrahlung and nonlinear Compton scatterings have also
been included in the simulations. In this work, simulations
with different target materials (Cu vs. Au) and varying laser
intensities are performed to study the parameter-dependent
features of X/g-ray radiations. The relative strength and
angular distributions of X/g-ray production from bremsstrah-
lung and nonlinear Compton scatterings are compared to each
other, and a threshold is determined under which the nonlinear
Compton scattering is dominant.
Conflict of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Science Challenge Project
(No. TZ2016005), National Natural Science Foundation of
China (No. 11605269, 11674341 and 11675245) and National
Basic Research Program of China (Grant No.
2013CBA01504).