Recent studies have shown that there exists a direct relationship between environmental pollutants
(PM2.5, smog), the respiratory system, and the morbidity and mortality of cardiovascular diseases.
However, the mechanism and principle of how these harmful substances are deposited in lung tissues
and impair lung function remain unclear. It is important to gain improved understanding of the inter-
action between environmental pollutants and human lungs. Owing to the complexity of air pollution and
toxicological risks, it is difficult to predict and evaluate the response of human lungs toward the damage
caused by air pollution. Although animal models can be used as a basis for toxicological classification, the
toxic effect on the human body could be very different from that on animals owing to the distinctive
features of different species. This article provides a comprehensive review of in vitro lung-on-a-chip
technologies and their application in the toxicological assessment of environmental pollutants. A
lung-on-a-chip uses a bionic structure mimicking the physiological characteristic of lungs, features of a
real airway, and condition of the physiological airflow. Accordingly, it can be used to reveal the intrinsic
interaction between lung tissues and particulate matter and provide new insights into the effect of the
toxicology of environmental particles on lungs. In addition, the development of novel and optimized
lung-on-a-chip devices and their application devices in the health assessment of air pollution are ex-
pected to overcome the limitations of the current in vitro toxicological tests. They are also anticipated to
provide effective and accurate methods for drug screening and toxicity testing. Finally, the application
potential of in vitro lung-on-a-chip models is emphasized in this review.
© 2022 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).1. Introduction
Common air pollutants from the environment such as SiO2
nanoparticles, diesel exhaust particles (DEPs), and E-cigarette can
cause pulmonary toxicity and chronic lung diseases such as chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), chronic bronchitis, and
asthma [1e3]. Exposure to air pollutants has a profound adverse
impact on human lung health [4]. Therefore, it is very important to
understand (1) how pollutants are transferred from the respiratory
tract to the alveolar tissues, impairing lung function and (2) howineering, College of Electrical
ao Tung University, Hsinchu,
.
an open access article under the Cparticle deposition in lung tissues affects human health.
Many environmental toxicants and their toxicological effects
have been identified and tested in animals [5,6]. However, the re-
sults obtained from animal testing in the past studies were
frequently biased for use on human bodies owing to the differences
in the structures and functions of the respiratory tracts of different
species [7]. Furthermore, it is difficult to conclude the potential
harm on the human body based on animal inhalation test results,
because numerous animals are required for an inhalation toxicity
test. Therefore, several regulations have been incorporated in the
Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals
(REACH) plan based on the objectives defined by the 3R principle:
reduction (promote the use of fewer laboratory animals), refine-
ment (refine the experimental procedures to minimize animal
suffering), and replacement (use test systems that do not involveC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
K.-C. Lin, C.-Z. Yen, J.-W. Yang et al. Materials Today Advances 14 (2022) 100216animals or only involve species with a low phylogenetic rate) [8].
The general concept is to support the use of alternative non-animal
testing to the maximum extent and avoid unnecessary animal
testing. Therefore, many in vitro models have been developed to be
used in air pollution toxicity tests to replace animal tests [9]. The
corresponding test standards have been proposed to provide ex-
perimenters with guidelines to follow in the in vitro model testing
process [10,11].
In recent years, the focus of research on environmental air
pollution toxicity has shifted to the use of microfluidics and its
integration with advanced three-dimensional (3D) tissue engi-
neering structures, “organ on chip”methods was created in vitro to
capturemore of the complexity of the cellularmicroenvironment of
humane body [12]. Among them, lung-on-a-chip (LoC) system can
not only have the biomimicry of the dynamic air-liquid interface,
but can even create the important human lung function of pul-
monary cilia and directional mucociliary clearance, which provides
new opportunities for environmental toxicology research [13]. In
this review, we introduced the effects of common environmental
pollutants on human lungs and provided a complete explanation of
the potential of lung-on-a-chip system in assessing environmental
pollutants.
2. Traditional method: animal models, advantages and
disadvantages
Most toxicological testing is conducted on animal models
following the regulatory testing requirements. In acute toxicology
testing, the entire body or the nasal inhaler of rodents is exposed to
a high concentration of the target substance for 24 h or less. The
research data can also be obtained in a short time. In subacute
toxicology testing, a repeated dose 28-day toxicity study is
frequently conducted, and the level of toxicity is determined based
on the non-observed adverse effect level. The response dose is
calculated based on the experimental data considering the differ-
ences between animals and humans as well as between different
individuals. Finally, the response dose is converted into the lowest
reference dose of human exposure to the toxicant. Carcinogenic
analysis of chronic toxicology requires a repeated doses study of
more than 24 weeks [14]. It is possible to conduct histopathological
analysis on tumor tissues to evaluate toxicant-induced tumori-
genesis in organisms and the impact of toxicant accumulation in
organs. The results obtained from chronic toxicity tests are used to
evaluate the potential carcinogenicity of the tested substance,
which can provide important data for analyzing the carcinogenic
risk of human exposure to that substance [14] (see Fig. 1).
Owing to the differences between different species, assessing
the hazards and risks of chemicals on the human body by testing on
rodents has been debated (Fig. 2A) [7]. The local toxicity of inhaled
substances in the respiratory tract is known to be affected by two
parameters: (1) the depositionmethod of the test substance and (2)
the specific immune response of the lung environment when
removing the harmful substance (Fig. 2B) [15]. However, the
deposition of inhaled substances is dependent on the dynamics of
the airflow. In particular, the difference in the deposition behavior
of particulate matter in animal models and humans is affected by
the different features of their lungs (Fig. 2C) [16]. Some examples
are the anatomical structure and organ geometry of the upper and
lower respiratory tracts, airway size, breathing pattern, and venti-
lation volume. In addition, different species exhibit numerous
distinct physiological characteristics, including the cell type and its
growth location in the respiratory tract, composition and distri-
bution of mucus in the airway, clearance function of macrophages,
and physiological mechanism and metabolic process of the airway
[17]. In many past studies, the toxicant detection and toxicological2
evaluation results obtained from animal tests were directly used to
calculate the minimum human exposure dose. This approach
frequently yields erroneous results. How to provide an effective and
accurate in vitro model of human tissues and re-explain the
interaction between toxicological substances and a real human
lung environment remain important problems to be solved ur-
gently in future toxicology testing [18].
3. Current in vitro environmental toxicity testing models
3.1. 3D cell culture insert models
Many environmental toxicity studies have already started to
investigate in vitro test models (Fig. 3A) [22]. At present, a com-
mercial in vitro organ model of the human mucociliary epithelium
(EpiAirway™) is available in the market for toxicological and drug
testing. In one past study, 59 chemical substances classified by the
European Chemicals Agency were used in in vitro testing and
evaluation. The tests were conducted using four test chemical
concentrations and the MTT viability assay to obtain dose/response
curves. The toxicity of each chemical on the in vitro model was
further determined and compared with rat test data. As shown by
the final results, the sensitivity and specificity ranges were 87.5%e
100% and 56%e89%, respectively. This study suggested that toxicity
research should focus on overcoming the drawbacks of animal
models to enable in vitro models to provide improved prediction of
acute inhalation toxicity. The study also emphasized the effective-
ness and major potential of the use of in vitro models in toxico-
logical tests [23].
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) evaluated a
novel in vitro model assay (MucilAir™), which can be used as an
alternative to animal testing. This method provides improved
inhalation risk assessment of chlorothalonil, a pesticide. To obtain
the toxicity equivalency concentration for human health risk
assessment, the above in vitro model was tested against chlor-
othalonil particle deposition, with the surface concentration
calculated from computation fluid dynamics simulation. The
MucilAir™ assay method was proposed in 2014, which provides
improved inhalation risk assessment of chlorothalonil. After un-
derstanding the relevance of using in vitro models for the toxicity
testing of pesticides or other contact irritants, the U.S. EPA started
to support their use instead of traditional animal tests for toxi-
cology testing. The corresponding test standards were further
provided by the EPA as guidelines for conducting in vitro model
tests [26].
3.2. Organ-on-a-chip models
Organ-on-a-chip (OoC) is a multichannel 3D microfluidic sys-
tem used for culturing cells. By combining cell biology, engineering,
and biomaterial technology, tissueeenvironment interfaces and
mechanical stimulations can be provided to such a chip to simulate
the micro-environment of organs [27]. OoC is a promising method
for simulating human pathology and physiology in an in vitro
environment, which overcomes the limitations of the current cell
and animal models (Fig. 3B) [28,25].
Although the animal models used in the past studies have
provided considerable experimental results and insights on lung
physiology and pathophysiology, they have significant limitations
in reflecting the structure, disease symptoms, and responses of the
human respiratory system. Therefore, it is important to develop
in vitro models for analyzing the pathogenesis of lung diseases,
drug efficacy, and inhalation toxicology. Lung-on-a-chip (LoC)
provides a strong support to the use of in vitro human lung models
for disease modeling, drug discovery, and drug testing [29].
Fig. 1. Mechanism of nanoparticle-induced pulmonary dysfunction. A: Hypothetical mechanism for SiNP-induced tight junction dysfunction [19]. B: Graphical scheme of the co-
culture model systems and the analysis of DEP-induced responses on epithelial and endothelial cells, and their interaction in the resulting inflammatory effects [20]. C: Overview of
the mechanisms by which e-cigarette use might cause acute endothelial dysfunction [21].
K.-C. Lin, C.-Z. Yen, J.-W. Yang et al. Materials Today Advances 14 (2022) 1002164. Lung-on-a-chip (LoC)
4.1. Dynamic air-liquid interface culture
A multifunctional microfluidic device was designed in a re-
ported study to simulate the human alveolaremicrovascular
interface [30]. This microfluidic system consisted of two poly-
dimethylsiloxane (PDMS) films separated by a thin polyester film
containing 400-nm-holes. Human alveolar epithelial cells and hu-
man lung microvascular endothelial cells were cultured on the
opposite sides of the extracellular matrix (ECM) coating film in the
microfluidic device, thereby creating two separate compartments.
The cells were arranged in each compartment. After the arranged
cells formed a double-layer tissue, the epithelial compartment was
exposed to air to form a unique type of aireliquid interface (ALI)
that mimicked the interface in lungs [24]. This interface allows
exchange of gas with air in an external environment, which typi-
cally occurs at the aireliquid barrier in the alveolar structure. By
manipulating the fluid flow in the microfluidic device, nutrients
can be delivered independently to the epithelium and the endo-
thelium [31,32].
As shown in the past studies, dynamic culture can provide cells
with sufficient nutrients and satisfy the nutrient load at a high cell
density in a metabolic environment. These features suggest that a
flowing system presents excellent culture performance, which al-
lows epithelial cells to grow rapidly. In addition, the shear stress
generated by the flowing fluid allows the cells to adjust their
morphology, proliferate, and differentiate [33]. It has been shown
in studies that in a shear stress environment, endothelial cells
demonstrate low pro-inflammatory response and high expression
of carbonmonoxide compounds. A low-shear environment can also
be used to simulate the microenvironment of vascular3
atherosclerosis [34,35]. A flow system presents excellent blood
delivery performance for the entire body; therefore, thrombosis
induced by inflammation can be analyzed quantitatively [36].
It is generally agreed in the studies on in vitro models of lungs
that culturing cells at the ALI is more representative of the real
physiological environment in lungs and more similar to the com-
plex in vivo microenvironment [37,38]. The cells in lung tissues
cultured in vitro under ALI and immersion conditions were found
to have very different features. In particular, A549 epithelial cells
cultured under the ALI condition presented a greater expression of
surface-active proteins and a higher surface tension than those
under the immersion condition. However, surface-active proteins
are required in the physiological alveolar environment to resist the
surface tension and support the establishment of the lung immune
environment [39]. In addition, an ALI is a necessary differentiation
condition required in the in vitro culturing of small human airways
such that the cells can differentiate into functional airway cells
(Fig. 4A) [40].
4.2. Tissue barrier function
Human lungs contain numerous epithelial tissues, which are in
constant contact with the external environment (Fig. 4B) [41]. The
barrier function of lung tissues serves as the first line of defense
against harmful environmental factors and infectious substances in
our daily life [44]. This barrier function is provided by the junctional
complex formed between the adherens junction and tight junction
proteins in closely arranged cells [45]. Past studies have shown that
inhaled toxins such as cigarette smoke and air pollution particles
can damage the connections between tissue cells, thereby leading
to excessive cell proliferation and abnormal epithelial differentia-
tion. The destruction of the barrier function may cause irreversible
Fig. 2. Differences in important characteristics between humans and animals. A: Interspecies differences in the structure of the upper respiratory tract in humans and animals and
the resulting differences in airflow mechanics [7]. B: Single-cell transcriptomic differences in conserved myeloid populations across individuals and species [16]. C: Comparison of
predicted deposition between tracheobronchial and alveolar trachea in mice and humans [15].
K.-C. Lin, C.-Z. Yen, J.-W. Yang et al. Materials Today Advances 14 (2022) 100216lung damage accompanied by lung diseases such as COPD and acute
lung injury.
The establishment of the barrier function has been one of the
main research topics on OoC systems. As shown by in vitro dynamic
culture experiments on human bronchi, cells cultured over a long
time under ALI and dynamic environments demonstrated a higher
expression of the tight junctional proteins than those cultured
under a static environment [46]. The shear stress generated by the
fluid could provide a stronger barrier function to the epithelial and
endothelial tissues. This phenomenon is related to the increase in
the intracellular calcium ions when the membrane ion channel,
TRPV4, is subject to the shear stress. These features further confirm
that the permeability of lung tissues can be regulated by the shear
stress in a dynamic culture environment [47]. In summary, a dy-
namic culture environment and the regulation of lung tissue
function are of major importance. These two factors provide new
insights into the establishment of a stable in vitro model of lung
tissues.4
4.3. Cilia and mucus
The lung trachea includes an airway, small airways, and alveolar
tissues. The airway is composed of four main types of cells: basal,
ciliated, goblet, and club cells. These cells form a physical barrier
that ensures the continuity, secretion, and regulation of the
epithelium. In addition, this physical barrier protects the airway
and the lung from inhaled pathogens and environmental pollutants
(Fig. 4C) [42]. Among all different types of cells, ciliated and goblet
cells in the airways are the most important because they form the
first line of defense in lungs. Goblet cells can produce mucin,
forming a gel layer on the surfaces of the airways. Subsequently
multiciliated cells drive the gel layer tomove by their power pulses,
which results in directional mucociliary clearance. Acetylated a-
tubulin (a-Ac-Tub) has been used as the main marker of ciliated
cells, which can remove particles and pathogens in the mucus from
the airways through the movement of the cilia on a coordinated
plane. Accordingly, the inhaled pollutants that are captured by the
Fig. 3. Current in vitro environmental toxicity models. A: Advancement of in cell culture and exposure technologies that result in physiologically more relevant in vitro models [24].
B: Human-on-a-chip philosophy is by integrating different organ-on-a-chip devices in a single plate [25].
K.-C. Lin, C.-Z. Yen, J.-W. Yang et al. Materials Today Advances 14 (2022) 100216mucus layer on the surfaces of the airways can be discharged from
the lungs [48,49].
As shown in the past studies, exposure to environmental pol-
lutants can lead to structural and functional abnormalities of the
cilia in the airways along with abnormal mucus clearance and
excessive mucus accumulation. These abnormalities cause various
lung diseases [50]. Furthermore, in vitro toxicology studies showed
that exposure to DEPs reduces the beat frequency of cilia cultured
in both healthy and diseased test groups. A physiological micro-
tissue of the lung epithelium was used as the basis of the toxicity
analysis [51].5
4.4. Polar proteins and directional mucociliary clearance
The cilia of the bronchial epithelial cells in the human respira-
tory tract pulsate toward the direction of the throat. Thus, air pol-
lutants can be removed from lungs once they are captured by the
mucus layer on the surface of the airways (Fig. 4D) [43]. Therefore,
the directional pulsation of cilia is of major importance for the
health of the respiratory system [52]. The cilia in the airway tissues
exhibit a collective and directional beating behavior. The exchange
of information between different cells is achieved mainly by the
planar cell polarity (PCP). There are two primary core PCP pro-
teinsdfrizzled 6 (FZD6) and Vang-like protein 1 (Vangl1)dwhich
are at the front and back of the cell polarity, respectively. These
Fig. 4. Characteristic of Lung-on-a-chip. A: Organ-on-a-chip systems of the human respiratory tract with dynamic air-liquid interface properties [40]. B: Schematic diagram of the
human lung barrier function [41]. C: An illustration of human mucociliary clearance and ciliary beating movement [42]. D: Relationships between important structures (ranging
from cell to tissue) and functions of airway cells [43].
K.-C. Lin, C.-Z. Yen, J.-W. Yang et al. Materials Today Advances 14 (2022) 100216proteins are located in the interstitial region between the cells,
which is related to the barrier function. During the growth of cili-
ated cells, the cilia undergo cytoskeletal remodeling and are
directed to the front position [43,53].
If the Vangl1 polar proteins become missing owing to mutation,
then the communication channel between the cells will be blocked.
In this case, the cilia will be unable to pulsate directionally, which
will result in accumulation of mucus in the airways and potential
risk of lung disease [54]. As shown by in vitro cell tests conducted
on an airway epitheliumwith cystic fibrosis and a nasal epithelium
with sinusitis, the absence of PCP signaling caused by the lack of
Vangl1 expression in the cell tissues affects cilia polarization and
generates evident mucociliary defects [55]. However, PCP has
received significant attention in the field of tissue engineering. It
was found that the orientation of tissue cilia and the flow direction
of mucus clearance remained unchanged nine months after
inverting the airway in a mouse. Past studies have also used a
mixture of cavernous body and collagen to grow human epithelial
tracheal tissues differentiated from human-induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSC). After transplanting these tissues into the trachea
of mice, the original tissue was cut off at two, six, and nine months
to examine the particle clearance rate and the pulsating direction.
However, no significant difference was found between the post-
operative and preoperative behavior. In addition, the PCP protein
was found to remain unchanged using FZD6 and Vangl1 as its
markers [56,57].
Based on the past literature, the formation of PCP protein during
epithelial differentiation is the key to the distinctive behavior of
cilia after differentiation. Studies have shown that the growth and
function of respiratory organs rely on an efficient and directional
fluid flow such that the cilia can swing in a directional manner [58].
To allow a differentiated airway to be used in tissue engineering, it
is critical to understand the correlation between PCP and the6
orientation of the cilia beating. In recent years, the development of
iPSC airway-on-a-chip has allowed control of the PCP direction of
multiciliated cells using the shear stress of the fluid [13]. This
technology can achieve a unidirectional mucociliary flow and
induce the differentiation of multiciliated cells, thereby providing
new breakthroughs and insights in airway reconstruction.
Furthermore, mechanical stress can be applied to adjust the PCP
and establish a directional cilia swing, enabling an LoC to remove
foreign bodies [59,60]. By introducing this capability, a more
comprehensive bionic model of airwaymucus cilia with a clearance
function can be developed for air pollution toxicology detection
and screening.
5. Application of lung-on-a-chip for air pollution toxicity
assessment
With the rapid industrial development and urbanization in
recent years, human hazards caused by air pollution from factories
and vehicles have become a major threat to the environment and
health safety. According to the statistics collected by the World
Health Organization, approximately 7million premature deaths are
due to air pollution every year [61]. Therefore, there is an urgent
need to evaluate the negative impact of air pollution on human
health. To evaluate and detect pollutant particles in air, several
in vitro LoC models have been developed and used in past studies.
These models allow assessing the impact of air pollution on bionic
lung tissues, which can provide new insights into the potential
harm of air pollution on human health.
With the rapid development of microfluidic processing and
production technology and the availability of lung cells, new
microfluidic systems that can evaluate the biological toxicity of
environmental substances more accurately and reliably by
combining substance concentration gradient generators and
K.-C. Lin, C.-Z. Yen, J.-W. Yang et al. Materials Today Advances 14 (2022) 100216bronchial epithelial culture have been proposed. A concentration
gradient of benzopyrene (BaP), a polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon,
was generated stably in experiments. A high concentration of BaP
was found to stimulate pronounced apoptosis. The type and
structure of the cells during the stimulation process were observed
via optical and fluorescent imaging. As shown by the results, a high
concentration of pollutants leads to a small cell size [62]. The image
analysis provided an in-depth understanding of the actin decom-
position process, contributing to the application and development
of microfluidic systems for dynamic monitoring of environmental
pollutants.
Microfluidic technology can strongly control substance con-
centration and generate bionic shear stress when integrated into a
comprehensive micro system. Accordingly, it can provide a dy-
namic and mechanical microenvironment to lung tissues and
reproduce complex lung physiology and pathological reactions. A
stretchable micro diaphragm can be produced using PDMS. Sub-
sequently, lung cells can form a tight lung barrier tissue on this
porous membrane. Such a membrane will experience cyclic
stretching generated by the micro system, simulating the respira-
tory mechanical stress in a real lung. As shown by experimental
results, the stretching behavior can affect the permeability of lung
tissues significantly [31]. No significant up-regulation of the ROS
occurred when SiO2 nanoparticles were added to upper lung tis-
sues without cyclic stretching. However, when the cells were sub-
jected to 10% tensile deformation and mechanical strain at a
pseudo-respiration frequency of 0.2 Hz, the SiO2 nanoparticles
were found to increase the ROS by four times within 2 h (Fig. 5A)
[32]. By applying a bionic mechanical strain to in vitro lung tissues
and analyzing the effect of the mechanical stress on the physio-
logical and pathological lung function, we can develop new un-
derstanding of the specific function of nanoparticle toxicology in
lung tissues.
Furthermore, an in vitro biomimetic alveolar system was
established with three-dimensional multiple tissues, air-liquid
interface, and dynamic circulation functions to analyze the harm-
ful effects of SiO2 and diesel exhaust particles (DEP). It can not only
explore the damage of harmful substances from fine PM to physi-
ological tissues, but can also in-depth analysis of specific harmful
substances that can penetrate through alveolar tissue and cause
health effects. This system led to efficiently identify the main par-
ticle size (size between 0 and 200 nm) and composition that are
harmful to the alveoli, which are very close to the phenomenon in
human alveoli (Fig. 5B) [63]. Another example is that 3D lung-on-a-
chip model has been shown to examine the adverse effects of
PM2.5 in the respiratory system. This model, lined by human
alveolar epithelial cell lines and human umbilical vein endothelial
cells, reproduced the organotypic structure and function of the
alveolarecapillary barrier. Using this chip, it was discovered that
the PM2.5 permeability alteration under various exposure levels in
a dynamic way. In addition, immunocytes could be introduced to
form a triple co-culture system to investigate the interaction of
injured tissue and immunocytes. Thus, it was found that a low
concentration of PM2.5 causes limited cytotoxicity to the epithelial
and endothelial cells, but a higher concentration of PM2.5
(>200 mg/mL) could significantly increase the ROS generation,
apoptosis, inflammation responses of epithelial cells and endo-
thelial cells and attachments of monocytes to the vessels (Fig. 5C)
[64]. Taken together, these methods showed great potential in
analyzing the extent of hazardous substances towards respiratory
health to overcome the technical bottleneck of traditional in vitro
assays and standard animal models.
Moreover, exposure to air pollutants is related to the patho-
genesis of pulmonary fibrosis, a human lung micro-tissue array
device has been developed to evaluate the biological toxicity of7
multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) and the corresponding
potential of pulmonary fibrosis. In this micro-tissue array device,
the heads of a pair of micro-pillars were arranged in a dog-bone
pattern, and epithelial micro-tissues were formed between the
micro-pillars. The contractile strength of a fibrotic tissue was
measured in situ between the micro-pillars. Stimulating a lung
epithelial tissue with a high concentration of MWCNTs led to a high
level of cytotoxicity. However, stimulating the tissue with a low
concentration ofMWCNTs producedmechanical forces found in the
natural fibrosis process. Apart from demonstrating the potential of
MWCNTs to induce pulmonary fibrosis, this study showed the
capability of the lung micro-tissue array system for the detection
and toxicant screening of air pollutants [67].
The importance of an ALI exposure environment has already
been demonstrated in past inhalation toxicology tests conducted
on ALI cultures. An in vitro model was stimulated by real exposure
technology (gas, vapor, aerosol), and the characteristics of the
exposed particles were examined carefully, including the particle
size distribution and the actual deposition concentration [17].
However, the development of LoC technology in recent years has
led to highly realistic inhalation detection that mimics the physi-
ology andmechanism of aerosol deposition on lung tissues from air.
These studies aim to reproduce the results of in vivo deposition
(local concentration, area) and achieve highly realistic in situ
detection, which have nowbecome important breakthroughs in the
research field compared to traditional in vivo and in vitro exposure
tests.
A past study had also proposed an in vitro exposure platform of
the human lung bronchial airway epithelium to simulate the
deposition of exposed particles in the airway tree structure. The
experiments revealed a characteristic local deposition of 2-mm
particles, which was related to the geometric structure of the
airway tree and the gravity-induced sedimentation of the particles
when transported by air. Compared with the extensive in vitro
models in the past, an LoC that uses the airflow to transport par-
ticles can better reflect the gravity-induced sedimentation behavior
of particles under different flow rates. Consequently, it can recon-
struct the characteristic local toxicological reactions in the geo-
metric structure of a lung (Fig. 5D) [65]. In addition, as shown by
the computer simulation of fine particle deposition on an in vitro
LoC, the deposition of fine particles is affected by numerous
different factors including surface adsorption and desorption ki-
netics, respirationmode, Brownian motion of the fine particles, and
gravitational sedimentation of the large particles. It was found that
the particle deposition rate during human movement is thrice
faster than that when at rest. This drastic increase was attributed to
the increase in the airflow and respiratory frequency during exer-
cise. Therefore, different respiratory exercises will also cause
different levels of particle toxicity [68].
In the inhalation dose toxicology tests of pollutants, subacute
exposure can result in highly clinically significant toxicity. A sub-
acute or long-term drug exposure can simulate the chronic inha-
lation toxicology of air pollution to lungsmore realistically. In a new
cell model system, hAELVi and THP-1 were used to simulate alve-
olar macrophages. Relevant cell organizations in the alveolar area
were reconstructed, and an in-situ exposure was provided to the
in vitro alveolar model. The lipopolysaccharide was aerosolized to
stimulate the cells and induce IL-8 secretion, and the toxicology
was monitored during the exposure period. This cell model system
provides a highly realistic and in vitro in situ exposure detection
platform for determining acute (48e72 h) and subacute (14e28
days) toxicity in the alveolar area. This LoC can provide prolonged
exposure and cell culture. The high stability of this new model and
the dose exposure tests at different periods provided a new in vitro
model concept for inhaled dose toxicology testing methods [69,70].
K.-C. Lin, C.-Z. Yen, J.-W. Yang et al. Materials Today Advances 14 (2022) 100216
8
K.-C. Lin, C.-Z. Yen, J.-W. Yang et al. Materials Today Advances 14 (2022) 100216In addition to environmental pollutants, smoking can impair the
physiological function of lungs and is the primary cause of COPD in
humans. However, the distinct characteristics of different patients
make it difficult to obtain bionic authenticity of the injury response
caused by smoking under physiological respiratory conditions. A
research team led by Harvard University developed an integrated
microfluidic chip that simulates the small airways of a human lung
using micro respirators and smoking machines. This device can
simulate the exposure of lung cells in the human body to smoke
and allows obtaining the breathing and smoking behavior param-
eters [71]. As shown by this LoC model, Nrf2, which is induced and
activated by the oxidative stress after smoke exposure, can regulate
the expression of ARE gene products (the second type of metabolic
detoxification enzyme, antioxidant protein, drug efflux protein
gene). The above microfluidic chip can further characterize the
abnormal ciliary swing and IL-8 as an indicator of the induced COPD
exacerbation, thereby demonstrating the toxic effects of smoking
on lungs (Fig. 5E) [66]. Furthermore, the use of e-cigarettes has kept
increasing in recent years with the objective to reduce the side
effects of traditional cigarettes. However, there is no substantive
proof that the inhalation during the use of e-cigarettes is safe for
human health. Therefore, the lung toxicology of e-cigarette expo-
sure has been investigated in many studies in recent years. These
studies have also examined the effect of e-cigarette exposure using
microfluidic small airway-on-a-chip. Although no significant dif-
ference in genomic expression was observed, the frequency dis-
tribution of the cilia beating was changed after e-cigarette
exposure. The same finding was obtained from other in vitro
models, with which no significant difference was observed. In
general, the environmental exposure at the ALI can better represent
the complete behavior of the human lung barrier and provide a
more comprehensive analysis and quantification of functional
proteins than an immersion stimulation in an e-liquid extract.6. Opportunities and challenges
Many past studies have developed functional LoC models to
analyze the toxicity of air pollution in the environment as well as
the pathophysiology of lung tissues at the molecular scale. The
novel LoC technology has also provided important data on the
function of a damaged human lung exposed to air pollution and
toxic particles, which allows assessment of in vivo toxicology and
human health [72]. However, to develop an LoC for studying an air-
contaminated environment, one must emphasize the cultivation
conditions in the bionic environment, which include the 3D tissue
microenvironment, tissues constructed by the ECM, and biome-
chanical environment of the tissues [73e76]. It is highly conducive
for cells to differentiate into specific functions related to the bio-
logical environment when human lung tissues are grown in a bi-
onic environment. In addition, the toxicity of inhaled air pollutants
in lungs is caused by a combined effect of the inhaled particles,
exhaust gas, and biomechanical environment. It is important to
keep a lung epithelial tissue in direct contact with air in an LoC
model to study the correlation between the mucociliary clearance
and the deposition of airborne particles in the dynamic airflow [77].
Developing models for fibroblasts and macrophages is critical
for the analysis of inflammation in lungs caused by air pollution.
Immune recruitment and interstitial thickening caused by theFig. 5. Application of lung-on-a-chip in air pollution research. A: Reproducing physiology o
permeability of SiO2 and DEP particles in chip devices. Reprinted with permission from th
exposure of epithelial and endothelial cells on the chip. Reprinted with permission from the s
patterns and quantification of particle deposition density in the airway-on-chip platform
Copyright 2020, the Frontiers. E: Schematic describing the overall method for analyzing e
smoke-induced ciliary dysfunction on-chip. Reprinted with permission from the study by B
9
inflammation of epithelial tissues can help rebuild the immune
blood circulation for removing particulates and provide metabolic
functions to an LoC. The features of a model can provide insights
into the highly specific interactions between nanoparticles and
cells as well as the related molecular mechanisms of inflammation.
Such findings facilitate the development of in vitromodels and help
understand the toxicity of air pollutants in lung tissues. In addition,
the intrinsic properties of air pollutants are of high importance in
the field of environmental toxicology. On-site exposure can provide
an in-depth understanding of the interaction between air pollut-
ants and the surface characteristics of the lung epithelium and
show the damage and surface composition of particulates of spe-
cific sizes in the lung environment. Moreover, it offers a novel
method for screening the toxicity of environmentally hazardous
substances and new materials.
An LoC is a highly repeatable, reliable, and compatible micro-
system. It has a high application potential in preclinical trials and
can reduce the inspection process effectively. In addition, an LoC
will significant implications in the field of air pollution monitoring
and toxicity assessment owing to its capability of detecting pollu-
tion sources and the toxicity of new materials in the early stage.
Consequently, relevant regulations and standards can be formu-
lated to restrict the pollutant exposure in human living environ-
ments. An LoC can be further used to help provide personalized
treatments for different types of diseases including COPD, pulmo-
nary fibrosis, and asthma. The high cost of drugs and the difficulty
in rapid detection of substance toxicity are the twomain drawbacks
of the existing models (animal models, 2D cell models). In contrast,
an in vitro LoC model can facilitate the pre-clinical development of
different available drugs and new drugs. It can also provide
personalized organ models to realize precision medicine. Finally,
the application of an LoC in air pollution research aims to provide a
standardized inhalation toxicity test that is reproducible and
repeatable as well as provides highly relevant data on the func-
tional structure of the lung microenvironment. However, the data
should be collected based on a large range of cell exposure condi-
tions and cell models. Using the specific behavior obtained from the
model as the toxicity endpoint, an LoC is expected to be used as a
substitute for animal-based inhalation toxicity tests to provide
more dependent explanations on the interaction between cells and
air pollution.7. Prospect
Air pollution is a very urgent global health problem. However,
the current in vitro cell assays and animal models still have a
bottleneck to explore the effect of fine particulate matter (PM) on
human health. In addition, most cell experiments are limited to the
analysis of the cytotoxicity of air pollution particles or components
on cells. Based on recent advances in human lung-on-a-chip tech-
nologies, this review provides new forms of human experiments
in vitro for evaluating harmful effects of air pollutants to more
physiologically and clinically relevant preclinical models than
traditional in vitro assays and standard animal models. Moreover,
their greatest novelty lies in their ability to reconstruct dynamic
vascular perfusion, tissue-tissue interface (aireliquid interface),
and lung-specific mechanical cues (cilia and mucus, polar proteins
and directional mucociliary clearance), which are the important in-f breathing in human body on lung-on-a-chip [32]. B: Size distribution and cumulative
e study by Lin et al. [63] Copyright 2021, the Elsevier. C: ROS generation after PM2.5
tudy by Xu et al. [64] Copyright 2020, ACS. D: Fluorescence image of particle deposition
following exposure. Reprinted with permission from the study by Shani et al. [65]
ffects of inhaled whole cigarette smoke and physiological recapitulation of cigarette
enam et al. [66] Copyright 2016, the Cell systems.
K.-C. Lin, C.-Z. Yen, J.-W. Yang et al. Materials Today Advances 14 (2022) 100216vivo physiological characteristics for the study of respiratory health
assessment. Therefore, the lung-on-a-chip technologies allow to
construct the artificial models with well-defined physiological
characteristics under biomimetic microenvironments. It can better
elucidate the relationship between the effects of air pollutants on
important cellular and molecular factors for human physiology and
pathophysiology compared to traditional experimental methods.
Overall, the ability of lung-on-a-chip technologies can recapitulate
human lung physiology, it makes possible to explore the in-
teractions of air pollutants with lung organs to assess the acute and
chronic adverse health effects of hazardous substances in the
future. These innovative biomimetic chip devices will pave the way
for reliable and more efficient testing of harmful substances
without the need for animal experiments.
Author statement
Ko-chih Lin: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology,
Project administration, Writing e original draft. Chun-Zai Yen:
Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Project adminis-
tration, Writing e original draft. Jia-Wei Yang: Writing e review &
editing. Johnson H.Y Chung: Writing e review & editing. Guan-Yu
Chen: Project administration, Funding acquisition, Supervision,
Writing e review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing
financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
G.Y.C. would like to acknowledge financial support from the
Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST-110-2636-E-009-007-),
Council of Agriculture, Executive Yuan (110AS-24.2.1-AD-U2) and
the Higher Education Sprout Project of the National Yang Ming
Chiao Tung University and the Ministry of Education, Taiwan.