This paper presents methods and techniques for teaching Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality
(AR) that were conceived and refined during more than 20 years of our teaching experience on these
subjects in higher education. We cover a broad spectrum from acquainting learners with VR and AR as
only one aspect of a more general course to an in-depth course on VR and AR during a whole semester.
The focus of the paper is methods and techniques that allow learners to not only learn about VR and
AR on a theoretical level but that facilitate their own VR and AR experiences with all senses and
foster hands-on learning. We show why this is challenging (e.g., the high workload involved with the
preparation of hands-on experiences, the large amount of course time that needs to be devoted), and
how these challenges can be met (e.g., using our Circuit Parcours Technique). Moreover, we discuss
learning goals that can be addressed in VR and AR courses besides hands-on experiences when using
our methods and techniques. Finally, we provide best practice examples that can be used as blueprints
for parts of a VR and AR course.
Based on ultrasound technology, novel devices have been de-
eloped that facilitate contactless haptic feedback [1]. Users can
eel forces mid-air which can be employed to render Virtual
eality (VR) or Augmented Reality (AR) into more multisensory
xperiences. Virtual objects can actually be touched. But just
eading about these devices is not sufficient to be able to really
nderstand them or to assess their potential for VR and AR
pplications. How do invisible force fields in the air feel like? How
onvincing is the illusion of touchable virtual objects? Hence,
eading texts, looking at images, watching videos, or listening to
ther people’s reports may be not sufficient to educate people
roperly about VR and AR. This is especially true when learning
bjectives need to be met that exceed the basic levels of Bloom’s
axonomy [2], i.e., when the learning goals are not just remem-
ering terminology or facts but applying acquired knowledge,
onducting analysis and synthesis, or making judgments. From
ur experience, teaching VR and AR without providing hands-
n experiences for every learner is a bit like teaching swimming
ithout using water. While the support of learning-by-doing
pproaches in education is one key application of VR and AR
ethods and systems [3] and their use for laboratory teaching
ethods has been explored [4], we focus on VR and AR itself as
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: ralf.doerner@hs-rm.de (R. Doerner).ttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.gvc.2021.200037
666-6294/© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access a
nc-nd/4.0/).the teaching subject in higher education in this paper. We iden-
tify challenges such as the high effort associated with preparing
hands-on sessions that deter educators from providing these VR
and AR experiences to learners. The problems are exacerbated by
the growing popularity of VR and AR as these subjects are not
only taught in in-depth courses devoted to VR and AR but are
becoming topics in courses on broader subjects such as civil en-
gineering, telemedicine, or human–computer interaction where
the time slot for VR and AR is limited and courses are not only
taught in dedicated VR or AR labs with specific equipment readily
available. The group of interested learners is not only getting
bigger but also more varied. In addition to computer science
students, students from other subjects ranging from chemistry
to the social sciences are part of the target group for VR and
AR courses. This trend can be attributed to several factors. Spe-
cific VR and AR hardware is available as consumer products
and reasonably priced. Specifically, mainstream smart devices
such as smartphones or tablets equipped with cameras or even
depth sensors are a suitable platform for VR and AR. Commercial
software products for different application domains ranging from
medicine to civil engineering are readily available. Thus, VR and
AR are becoming basic technologies in a variety of applications,
for example, in industry, medicine, civil engineering, marketing,
entertainment, and education. As a consequence, interest in VR
and AR is growing and so is the demand for learning opportunities
about these topics. Not only students are interested in VR and
AR, but specialists and decision makers also want to learn about
VR and AR in order to assess the potential of these technologies
or their purposes, improve their work processes, or create new
usiness opportunities. Last but not least, educators are becoming
nterested as VR and AR have the potential to provide innovative
nd valuable means for teaching and training.
In this paper, we present methods to meet these challenges
hat were developed during our more than 20 years of teaching
xperience in VR and AR in computer science faculties in several
niversities. This includes a technique we started formulating and
efining 10 years ago and that we call the ‘‘circuit parcours tech-
ique’’ as it is inspired from circuit training in sports and centers
round the idea to build a parcours or "‘obstacle course"’ of VR/AR
emonstrations. We introduced this technique in a presentation
t the education track of the Eurographics 2021 conference [5].
his journal paper provides a more in-depth description of the
ircuit parcours technique, a more elaborated phase model, and
dditional best practice examples for its use. We expand the re-
ated work section as well as the discussion of challenges and the
iscussion of a phase model for teaching VR and AR. Moreover,
e present and discuss unpublished results from a recent survey
mong our course participants from the last 5 years. We also
iscuss COVID-19 related issues for hands-on teaching of VR and
R that show perspectives on how our methods can be applied
n distance learning.
The contribution of this paper is
• insights about peculiarities and challenges when teaching
VR and AR at universities,
• dedicated methods and techniques for teaching VR and AR
including the circuit parcours technique and phase-based
teaching methods,
• description of different innovative teaching examples that
can serve as best practice or template together with a dis-
cussion of the rationale for the organizational and didactical
decisions made with a view to different learning objectives,
• reflection on our practical experience as well as evaluation
results that identify strengths, weaknesses, and limitations
of the methods and techniques presented in the paper.
The paper is organized as follows. We review related work
n the next section. Then, we identify challenges associated with
roviding first-hand experience in university courses on VR and
R. Next, we present our teaching techniques in detail before we
ntroduce our phase-based teaching method. Based on this con-
eptual groundwork, we provide example scenarios. Finally, we
hare experiences and discuss lessons learned from our practice
nd our evaluation before we conclude and give an outlook on
uture work.
. State of the art
Work in literature over the last decades, e.g., [6,7], highlights
he importance of hands-on experience in learning in general.
n a fundamental level, several learning theories see experi-
nce made by students as an indispensable element. Prominent
xamples are theories based on constructivism which also influ-
nces instruction techniques [8]. Specific theoretical approaches
uch as motivational active learning [9] focus on positive as-
ects of constructivism such as increased learner motivation or
reativity [10].
In this literature, the term ‘‘hands-on’’ is used figuratively and
ot linked to the actual use of hands, e.g., for improving motor
kills in the education of surgeons [11]. For instance, motiva-
ional active learning has been used in teaching computer science
here the learning subject is abstract and does not involve really
ouchable objects. The 6E model (that distinguishes six phases2
called Engage, Explore, Explain, Engineer, Enrich, Evaluate) fea-
tures hands-on activity as a key part and has been used with the
goal to better the learners’ understanding of abstract scientific
concepts and building of mental models [3]. In our work, we also
use a phase model and literature emphasizes the value of cyclical
learning patterns and repetition (e.g., to not only move through
the phases once) [12].
Object-based learning [13] is another example of a specific
theoretical constructivist approach that is used in higher edu-
cation. Here, the hands-on experience is tightly coupled with
engaging sensations of many senses simultaneously for a better
learning outcome. The role of senses in education is the topic of
many publications that emphasize their significance [14]. Espe-
cially the value of first-hand experiences, i.e., direct sensations
made by the learner, is not to be underestimated.
In VR and AR, we have the particular case that senses play
a central role. Constructs of perception such as presence [15] is
at the core of the overall VR and AR methodology. Hence, much
effort is invested in employing immersive technologies in VR and
AR applications. The experience and the perception associated
with using these immersive technologies cannot be conveyed
appropriately with just textual or oral descriptions as we cannot
put ourselves in the minds of other persons [16]. Overall, we see
this bulk of work in the literature about the hands-on experience
and learning as supporting our hypothesis that a technique for
instruction and organization of courses that enables and ensures
the inclusion of immersive experiences for all students can make
a valuable contribution.
This dovetails with the observation made in the literature that
one significant benefit of using VR and AR is in teaching. Over
two decades ago, experts wondered whether VR is the teaching
tool of the twenty-first century [17]. One of the major reasons for
employing these technologies is the opportunity that students are
able to have hands-on experiences [18]. Many case studies and
literature reviews such as [19–21] are described in the literature.
There is evidence that the usage of VR technology not only led to
better learning performance but also better hands-on capabilities.
Some authors even see the potential to revolutionize teaching in
VR and AR because of this [22]. VR and AR can even enable hands-
on experience in distance learning [23]. Thus, when hands-on
experiences are essential for teaching any subject, these experi-
ences should be especially crucial when the subject is teaching
VR and AR itself.
There is way more literature available on using VR and AR
as technologies in education than on teaching the subject of
VR and AR. Häfner et al. share their approach with a practical
course for teaching VR that involves four overlapping phases.
In the first short phase, learners are introduced to VR in the
form of lectures (e.g., brief presentations such as ‘‘Definitions
and Applications of VR’’ or ‘‘Software techniques and solutions
for VR’’ that are combined with lab demonstrations in order
to lay a theoretical foundation. These demonstrations allow for
hands-on experiences in order to improve understanding and
help the students to stay focused during the lectures. The second
phase contains exercises intending to acquaint students with VR-
specific software. In the third and longest phase, small groups
of learners are formed and assigned a task for a project. Spe-
cial effort is spent to find tasks interesting for students and
in line with the goals of the course as well as to simulate an
industrial work environment. The fourth phase comprises a soft
skills evaluation and a final evaluation. This method is, however,
not flexible in the sense that it always requires a full semester.
Moreover, it is not specific to VR and AR but could be used
for any other software tool that can be used in a project. We
shared a technique for teaching VR and AR that we named the
circuit parcours technique. Section 4 contains a more in-depth
Description of this technique (the same as this journal paper can
be considered an extended and elaborated follow-up publication,
see also Section 1). With only a few publications on teaching the
subject of VR and AR, there is still a need for more techniques
that lower the organizational barriers for including VR and AR in
reaching, especially if hands-on experiences with VR and AR are
art of the instruction.
The lack of dedicated techniques and methods for teaching VR
and AR can be considered unexpected as the number of curricular
that contain VR and AR is growing. Although these curriculas
have been characterized as fragmented and heterogeneous [24] a
decade ago, courses about VR and AR development are becoming
more popular and varied as it is feasible to use low-cost systems
for several years now [25]. Now, a more serious obstacle than
costs is the creation of content. Here, tools and matching author-
ng approaches such as VR/AR Nuggets [26] have been identified
us effective solutions. Nguyen et al. report that VR/AR applications
can be developed successfully within courses and students were
able to adopt necessary tools [27]. Therefore, we will assume in
our work that the prerequisite of existing suitable authoring tools
can be met.
In the literature, a good overview of the discussion of VR/AR
ourses and corresponding curricula can be found in [28]. Immer-
ion and experiences are often part of VR and AR curricula [29].
urdea et al. [30] point out the importance of imagination and ex-
erience besides immersion. Moreover, VR and AR are often part
f longer courses, in particular, capstone courses [31]. Not many
pproaches in literature employ techniques that are suitable for
uch in-depth courses as well as basic courses or even short
ntroductions to VR and AR that can be taught within one day.
he resulting reduced flexibility can pose challenges to integrate
R/AR teaching in existing curricula structures. As a consequence,
R and AR may still not be well reflected in the curriculum
f many undergraduate institutions although ideas that do not
isrupt curricular structures exist for some time [32].
Even early work on teaching VR sought the close combina-
ion with other skills such as software engineering and team-
ork [33]. Meanwhile, experience with courses that teach VR and
R demonstrate the positive effects of group work [34]. Moreover,
any approaches to teach VR/AR are project-based [35,36] which
rovides substantial opportunities for group work. Existing re-
earch work also shows that VR/AR courses can address learning
oals beyond VR and AR technologies and methodologies such
s creativity, problem-solving skills, or presentation skills [37].
ecent work [38] highlights that VR is especially valuable for
1st-century learners who live in an era where the term ‘‘experi-
nce age’’ has been coined. In this era, soft skills such as empathy,
ystems thinking, abstract reasoning, and computational literacy
re becoming more important. VR and AR play a crucial role as
hey support the acquisition of these soft skills in contrast to
ther learning techniques [39]. Thus, a good instruction technique
or VR and AR learning should foster group work, project-based
earning, and the acquisition of soft skills. Such suitable instruc-
ion and organization techniques were and are still open areas of
esearch [24,28].
One aspect that influences the importance of hands-on ex-
erience in teaching VR and AR is the question of what prior
nowledge and experiences students already possess when they
tart a VR/AR course. After all, 6.1 million VR headset units are ex-
ected to be sold in 2021 bringing the total cumulative installed
ase to 16.44 million units [40]. The global VR market size alone
s estimated to increase from roughly five billion U.S. dollars in
021 to more than 12 billion U.S. dollars by 2024 [40]. In 2020,
he number of smartphone users worldwide was estimated to
e 3.5 billion persons [41]. With the camera and computation
apabilities of modern smartphones, billions of people own a s
3
technological platform suitable for AR. Therefore, it is good prac-
tice to assess the prior experience in VR and AR at the beginning
of a VR/AR course as access barriers to these technologies have
been dramatically lowered. However, it cannot be expected that
all learners had the opportunity to have the first-hand experience
with AR and especially VR. Moreover, more sophisticated VR
and AR technology such as a CAVE or a Microsoft Hololens is
far from commonplace. Because of the dynamic improvements
(e.g., increasing field-of-view, increasing display resolution) of
VR and AR technology, prior experience from just a few years
ago does not reflect the state-of-the-art properly. Thus, affording
hands-on experience is crucial despite the higher availability of a
subset of VR and AR technology.
3. Challenges and requirements
Although barriers such as high costs, low graphical quality or
lack of robustness have been remedied with modern consumer
platforms in many application scenarios such as VR exposure
therapy [42], VR and AR as technologies are not commonplace
today. Many general challenges have been identified in the scien-
tific literature and in studies, e.g., AR industry experts named user
experience and lack of content offerings as the leading barrier for
mass adoption of AR in a recent survey [40]. All these problems
also apply to teaching VR and AR. In the following, we identify
additional obstacles that are more specific and are a hurdle for
educators to include hands-on experience in their VR and AR
courses.
Procurement Challenge There exists a large variety of hardware
used for realizing VR and AR, for example, head-mounted displays
(HMDs), stereo projections, haptic feedback devices, controllers,
tracking systems, and depth sensors, or motion platforms. More-
over, there exists a wide range of setups such as a 3D power
wall, a CAVE, a virtual workbench, AR with video-see-through on
a handheld smart device, AR with direct-see-through employing
AR HMDs, or walking in place setups such as the Virtuix Omni.
Ideally, students are provided the opportunity to get firsthand
experience across this whole variety. However, this is laborious
and time-consuming.
Bottleneck Challenge Some VR and AR devices are still expen-
sive and not available in a large number. This results in lengthy
sessions if only one student can have a VR/AR experience at one
time and raises the questions of what the other students can do
during that time.
Supervision Challenge Especially in HMD-based VR where users
might not be able to see their real surroundings, it can be nec-
essary to supervise students during the experience, e.g., because
of tripping hazards or because students may suffer from cyber-
sickness. This can completely occupy the educator and result in a
logjam.
Access Challenge VR/AR hardware may not be available to
students outside course hours. Therefore, it is not possible to plan
the VR/AR experience as part of their homework. As a result, a
significant amount of the course time needs to be invested.
Time and Effort Challenge Preparing the demonstration of VR/AR
ardware with according application examples can take a large
mount of time. Moreover, there might be significant effort in-
olved in setting up the VR/AR demonstration before the lesson
nd putting it away after the lesson. This time burden associated
ith VR/AR demonstrations could force educators to give up on
he idea of integrating VR/AR demonstrations in their courses.
Space Challenge VR and AR setups may need significant floor
pace (e.g., the VR HMD HTC Vive has a tracking space of up to
0 m2) and control of environmental conditions (e.g., window
linds to limit direct sunlight). As a result, the lecture room might
ot be able to accommodate several setups in parallel or some
etups at all limiting the opportunity for hands-on experiences.
Fig. 1. The circuit parcours technique. Two snapshots of a demo session are shown — in this example groups of two students are formed and each group member
has either the role of a presenter or a participant at the various demo stations each with a different VR/AR demo.
Table 1
Overview of variables of the circuit parcours technique.
Variable Description
T Circuit parcours duration of one event
e Number of events for one circuit parcours
E Overall circuit parcours duration
n Students
k Groups/demo sessions in one time slot
s Group size
t Time limit per participant per station
g Guests
N Total number of demo sessions
tsetup Setup time before an event
b Number of breaks within one event
tbreak Break time per break
tend Disassembling time after the event
Educator Proficiency Challenge As in other applications of VR
nd AR [43], the lack of educators’ familiarity is a challenge even
f they have a positive attitude towards it. This is not so much
f a problem in in-depth courses that are taught by VR and AR
rofessionals but in courses where VR and AR are just one among
any other topics. Educators are not aware of best practice
xamples or lack basic teaching material such as textbooks [24].
his can result in low self-efficacy to use VR in teaching in
eneral [44]. As providing opportunities for hands-on experience
s more demanding than just lecturing facts about VR and AR,
specially less proficient educators might refrain from including
irst-hand experiences in their teaching if they are not adequately
upported. Requirements for VR and AR teaching techniques and
ethods can be directly derived from all the challenges identified.
. Teaching technique
In this section, we contribute a technique for teaching VR and
R courses, the circuit parcours technique [5]. The basic idea
s to organize and hold an event where multiple VR and AR
emonstrations take place simultaneously. This provides ample
pportunities for learners to have many experiences similar to
ircuit training. Also, it is our goal that the format of a parcours
s fundamentally different from other learning scenarios in that it
s perceived as exciting change and that learners enjoy the event-
ike character. Our technique is illustrated in the diagram in Fig. 1.
he parameters we will use in the following are listed in Table 1.
Let us assume that we have n students and one teacher inhe course. We divide the students in k groups of equal size s
4
with s = n/k). Moreover, we have k stations. At each station,
everal identical VR/AR demonstrations will take place where one
tudent will be able to experience this demonstration and gain
irsthand experience at a time. Each station has an according set
p of VR/AR hardware and software. The VR/AR demonstrations
iffer from station to station. For each demonstration, a fixed
mount of time is available. The teacher specifies this number of
minutes and communicates this to all groups.
In the event, four roles are distinguished: the presenter, the
participant, the observer, and the guest. During each demo ses-
sion, there is one participant present who is actively engaged
in the VR/AR experience provided at the station. The role of
the presenter is to prepare the next presentation (e.g., to wipe
down devices in order to meet hygienic standards or to reset
the software), to welcome the participant, to provide some back-
ground explanations concerning the demonstration, to guide the
participant through the demonstration, to ensure the safety of the
participant during the demonstration, and to conduct a debriefing
after the demonstration. The role of the observer is to monitor the
demonstration (e.g., to check that the time limit is obeyed), to
make notes about observations during the demonstration, and to
assist the presenter when necessary. In each demo session, there
is one person who takes the role of the presenter. The number
of persons who take the role of an observer can vary between
0 and s − 1. An additional number of g guests can be invited,
e.g., students who are not in the course, friends, or family. The
educator can be among these guests who also participate in a
demo session at selected stations (e.g., to fill open slots).
The educator prepares a timetable where all demo sessions
are listed. For each demo session, the timetable provides the
following information: the start time, the name of the participant
at each station (either a guest or a member of a group that was
not assigned to the station), and the names of the presenter and
potential observers (who are all members of the group assigned
to the station). There are N = n · (k − 1) + g · k demo sessions in
otal. As there are k demo sessions in a single time slot, N/k time
lots of length t minutes need to be planned. The event phase
tarts with the setup where the demonstration at all stations is
repared and set up. This takes tsetup minutes. The educator is in
harge of ensuring that the timetable is kept. The educator signals
e.g., using a gong) when a demo session is to start. Each student
ill visit all stations (except the station the student is assigned
o) and experience the corresponding demos in the role of a
articipant. In the remaining time, the student is at the assigned
tation and serves either as a presenter or observer.
In order to mitigate the effect that unforeseen events mess up
he schedule in the timetable, several b breaks of tbreak minutes
an be planned. The purpose of these breaks is not only relax-
tion and providing all persons the opportunity for a drink, food,
r a bathroom break but also synchronization among the sta-
ions. Moreover, the breaks provide time to replenish resources
e.g., load batteries). If one demo session takes longer, further
essions may be affected as the presenter or the participant may
ot be available in time for their following demo sessions. That
an cause a ripple effect that can be stopped with breaks that
ork as a time buffer. We recommend that the educator stops
he time for common actions (e.g., for walking from one station
o another, for disinfecting an HMD with wipes, for putting on
n HMD) and gathers other time-related information, e.g., battery
ife or calibration times. This should ensure that enough time has
o be planned for switching stations (e.g., to cater for cleaning
imes between two demos in order to adhere to hygienic stan-
ards) and breaks that serve as buffers are important in order to
revent that everything is thrown out of sync. It is also valuable
o have a big clock visible from every station and an audible signal
such as a gong or a ring) that informs everybody that a new
ession starts.
After the last demo session, the stations are disassembled.
his takes tend minutes. Overall, the event takes the time T =
setup+(N/k)·t+b·tbreak+tend. If the duration of T is too long to fit
n the teaching schedule, the event phase needs to be split. This
dds an additional time tsetup + tend for each additional meeting. If
is the number of all events to be held and E is the time needed
or all event phases, than E = T ·e in case we split the event phase
in a way that all e events have the same length. We can calculate
E directly as E = e · tsetup + e · (b · tbreak) + (N/k) · t + e · tend.
. Phase model
We integrate the event from the circuit parcours technique in
phase model in order to obtain a method for teaching courses
n the subject of VR and AR. Here, we distinguish six phases.
n phase 1, the outline phase, the educator outlines how the
ircuit parcours technique is embedded in the course. One of the
iggest challenges for the educator is to ensure that each group
as roughly the same workload for preparing the demonstration
t their station. As all stations are different, suitable tasks have to
e identified by the educator that the group is able to accomplish
n the time frame of the course. Moreover, these tasks should
either underchallenge nor overwhelm the groups. For this, the
ducator needs knowledge of the students’ competencies. There
s a wide spectrum concerning difficulty in content creation for
he demonstration. On the one hand, existing applications can
e employed as is. However, they are often a black box for the
tudents and the demo preparation is too effortless. On the other
and, students can create the demonstration from scratch using
ow-level APIs such as Vulkan and corresponding GPU shaders.
ere, the VR nugget approach is particularly interesting as it is
n the middle of the spectrum where not many solutions are
resent. The preparation effort on the educator’s side should not
e underestimated. Not only need suitable tasks and development
nvironments to be identified but also additional material such
s 3D geometry assets need to be provided if this cannot be
ade part of the students’ tasks. Moreover, instruction has to be
repared, e.g., in the form of a textbook, video tutorials, or lecture.
his might differ from station to station. Part of the planning is
lso the calculation of the times for the events that need to fit the
ndividual time constraints of the course. Finally, the educator has
o assess how the circuit parcours pattern can be tailored to fit the
onstraints of the course or curriculum. It might be even neces-
ary to change the curriculum or the organization of teaching in5
order to fully exploit the advantages of the presented technique.
One particular problem occurs if the number of students is not
divisible by the number of stations. A good solution is to have
some groups that are slightly bigger than the others and to invite
guests during the event to make sure that all stations are fully
occupied during each session and that all students can take the
role of a participant and the role of a presenter.
In phase 2, the assignment phase, each group is assigned to
one station. The demonstration to be given at each of the k
tations is specified and required VR/AR hardware and software
s selected and made available to the groups. The educator either
ands a complete specification to the group assigned to the
tation or provides this group with just some constraints (e.g., the
ardware to be used in the demonstration). In the latter case,
he educator asks the group to complete the specification. This
ime t has to be considered when specifying the demonstra-
ion. Moreover, the groups are instructed as planned in phase
. For instance, the groups may be assigned some learning tasks
e.g., reading assignments for background information or manuals
f VR hardware) and corresponding learning material (e.g., a
extbook for VR and AR that is suitable for self-study such as [45]).
In phase 3, the preparation phase, each group prepares the
ardware and software infrastructure for the specified demon-
tration (e.g., procuring the hardware, configuring the software).
hey test the VR/AR setup at their station. Moreover, they work
ut an action plan for conducting a demo session that also takes
he timing and the different roles into account. In the preparation
hase, demo sessions are rehearsed, and based on the outcome of
he rehearsal the action plan is altered. The action plan needs to
nsure that the time limit of t minutes is obeyed. In the rehearsal,
he members of the group assigned to a station take on each role
t least once.
In phase 4, the event phase, the event takes place as described
n the previous section. We found it to be beneficial that the
ducator is not just an observer during the event but a guest at
very station participating in each demo. This allows the educator
o interact with each group and provide some feedback after the
vent. Alternatively, the educator can serve as a pilot user for each
tation during the preparation phase.
Phase 5, the presentation phase, data gathered during the
vent phase is analyzed and presented. For instance, students
ould be asked to perform a qualitative or even quantitative eval-
ation based on their observations at their station. These results
ogether with the description and discussion of their demonstra-
ion protocol, lessons learned when implementing the prototype
oftware, lessons learned when conducting presentations and
ser tests, and overall observations and conclusions could be
ssembled in a report or presented to the other groups in a
ession following the event.
Phase 6, the reflection phase, is added to deepen the ex-
erience and reinforce the learning results at the end of the
ourse. Reflections could range from filling in a questionnaire
ndividually to short informal discussions among students about
heir own experiences and observations to more formal reports.
he reflection phase is valuable for the educator to evaluate the
rogress of the students or for grading purposes. Moreover, the
ducator can gather pieces of information about the students’
erformance by observing the presentations (especially if the
ducator serves as a pilot participant or guest), by examining
he software created, and by evaluating the overall presentation
esign. As presenters can be observed individually and the group
an be asked to detail and rate each team member’s contribution,
t is feasible to assess each student’s individual performance
espite relying heavily on group work. In the simplest case, the
oal is to provide a firsthand experience of VR/AR and the mere
articipation of a student trying out a VR/AR presentation is
ufficient to ensure that this goal is met.
The educator can tailor the phases to the requirements and
onstraints of an individual course. For instance, phase 3 can take
everal weeks when the learners develop their own demonstra-
ors or just a couple of minutes when students learn how to start
pre-installed software. The educator may also decide to omit
hases, e.g., the reflection phase may be omitted if the educator
as not sufficient time for it.
Instead of a linear succession of phases, iterations can be
ntroduced in the phase model. We distinguish inner iterations
nd outer iterations. In an inner iteration, the phases 2 to 5 can
e repeated multiple times. Thus, several events take place, the
earners prepare multiple demonstrations, more opportunities for
ands-on experience are provided, and the students can apply the
essons learned in one iteration directly to the next iteration. In an
uter iteration, the whole group of learners is split into subgroups
or whom the phase model is applied separately. As a result,
ultiple isolated events take place with the same stations. For the
ducator, it is interesting to compare the results. If time permits,
ll subgroups can share phase 5 and are also able to compare the
esults made at the same station by different subgroups. In order
o save time, a variation is to have parallel meetings of all student
roups that were assigned to the same station. As they were given
he same task, for these groups it is particularly interesting to
ompare results and exchange experience.
Finally, we introduce coupling points in the phase model
here a connection to other courses can take place. Being con-
ucted in a relatively short time frame and being self-contained,
he event phase serves as an excellent coupling point. For in-
tance, course A is an in-depth course where students prepare
ven the demonstrations themselves while VR and AR are just
ne of many subjects in course B. Both courses can be coupled
y inviting learners in course B to take the role of guests in
he circuit parcours. Learners from course A benefit as they can
ather more data and more experience. Learners from course B
enefit as they are provided with opportunities to get some first-
and experience. Other coupling points can be placed in phase
. For instance, course A again is an in-depth course on VR and
R while course B is a course on human–computer interaction
r usability engineering. The learners from course B can attend
he presentations from course A which affords these learners
o hear the first-hand experience from their fellow students
ow they conducted demonstrations or even how they planned,
xecuted, and analyzed usability tests. If learners in course B
dentify interesting research questions, they can submit these
uestions to course A. Here, the coupling point lies in phase 2.
he complete phase model is depicted in Fig. 2.
. Best practice
A first example for employing our methods to an under-
raduate course ‘‘‘Virtual and Augmented Reality’’’ for computer
cience students in their 4th semester. The course has 15 partic-
pants and a workload of 150 h. The course is taught in a VR/AR
ab. Four hours per week consist of lecture-based instruction, stu-
ent presentations, practical work, and tutoring. The proportion
f these varies over time with an emphasis on instruction at
he beginning of the course and a focus on students’ practical
ork at the end. Overall, the ratio of instruction and practical
ork is roughly 40:60. Moreover, students possess a chip card to
reely enter the VR lab where each student has access to a locker
hat stores their VR/AR equipment. In phase 2, the students are
ivided into five teams of equal size. Each team receives some
R/AR hardware and a research question where a user test needs
o be conducted in order to evaluate two alternatives. For exam-
le, one group receives a VR HMD and is tasked to compare two
ifferent techniques for navigation in a VR environment. Another6
Fig. 2. Phase model for teaching VR and AR.
example would be a group that receives a tablet and an AR HMD
and is asked to evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of
direct-see-through and video-see-through. A third example is a
task where different techniques to visualize teleportation in VR
should be compared. The educator prepared these tasks in phase
1. The time for each demo session was set to t = 20 minutes.
In phase 3, each group needs to develop prototype software that
serves as the basis for the user test. Various software such as
game development platforms (e.g., Unity), dedicated VR software
(e.g., Autodesk VRED), or toolkits (e.g., ARKit) is used so that
students do not need to start from scratch. The educator supports
the students concerning prototype development but also provides
feedback to the planning of the user test, e.g., by reviewing the
questionnaires to be used. The educator provided a schedule, so
it was clear who had to be at which station in which role during
the event. The main event (phase 4) had to be split into two
dates. Two guests were also present. One of the guests was the
educator who could also experience each station. Two breaks
with tbreak = 5 min were planned, tsetup was set to 15 min, tend was
set to 10 min. Two stations of the event are depicted in Fig. 3. In
summary, each of the two events had seven demo sessions and
took 175 min. The students organized the third event voluntarily
where they invited friends, family, and fellow students. In phase
5, each group gave three presentations. The first presentation
was about educating the other students in the course about the
software they have used for prototyping and the lessons learned
using this software. In the second presentation, each group re-
ported the results of the user tests (including statistical analysis)
and discussed them. With the two regular events, each group had
conducted 14 user tests (involving the twelve other students who
were not in their group plus the two guests), with the additional
third event this number was increased to 22 user tests which
provide a good amount of data for meaningful statistical analysis
and discussion. For phase 6, the third presentation was about
the reflection of the experiences in the course where all groups
focused on the experiences they made when trying out the VR
and AR equipment at other stations. The 15 weeks of the semester
were distributed among the phases as follows: phase 2 took one
week, phase 3 took nine weeks, phase 4 took two weeks, phase
5 took two weeks, phase 6 took one week. The outline phase
(phase 1) took the educator ca. 40 h in total before the semester
started (e.g., procuring the hardware, time planning, ideas for
tasks, elaboration of the tasks).
The second example for employing our methods is a two-
ay course for the further education of university teaching staff
ho have no background in VR or AR but want to assess how
ar these technologies can benefit their teaching. The number of
articipants is 12. In the second phase, groups of two are formed
nd each group receives a device with VR or AR capabilities
e.g., an iPad, an Oculus Go VR-HMD, a Microsoft Hololens). There
s one pre-installed app on each device, for instance, Froggi-
edia (an AR learning app about biology from the Apple App
tore), Human Anatomy VR (a VR App available in the Oculus
pp Store that supports the exploration of the human anatomy),
amsung’s BeFearless VR app for training public speaking, or
icrosoft’s Dynamics 365 AR-based collaboration app for the
icrosoft Hololens. For the 60 min preparation phase, each group
as given the task to become acquainted with the software,
ead manuals or watch video tutorials, and plan a 10-minutes-
ong demonstration. The groups are told that in this demo, a
hort introduction should be provided, and the VR app or AR
pp should be exhibited. Immediately afterwards, phase 4 started
ith a total of 10 demo sessions at six stations. Overall, this
vent phase took 120 min (tsetup = 0 minutes plus 10 · t = 10
inutes plus two breaks with tbreak = 5 minutes plus tend = 10
inutes). In total, three hours of the course time were devoted to
he demonstration so that participants could get some firsthand
xperience. Phase 5 was skipped. In the sixth phase, a group
iscussion is started where experiences made are reflected and
ach participant is asked to write down three (or more) ideas
n light of the impressions of the demos on how VR and AR
echnologies might improve their teaching.
A third example is an undergraduate course in chemistry in
he third semester where students have a laboratory course in7
which they spend four hours per week in one of the university’s
laboratories and four hours per week preparing the course at
home. Digitalization also became an important topic in chemistry
and the educators want that their students get some firsthand
experience with virtual laboratories. They want that students are
able to assess the value of VR as a tool for preparing laboratory
experiments. The 120 students of the course are already divided
into six groups of 20 students for the practical lab work and these
groups are treated identically in the following. In phase 2, each
of these groups is further divided into groups of 3 students each
(and one group with only two students) who are assigned to
seven stations. Each station has a different topic (e.g., the presen-
tation of some lab equipment or a specific chemical experiment)
and has some VR headset (reaching from simple headsets such
as Google cardboard to more sophisticated VR HMDs). In the
preparation phase, the students work through a video tutorial
where they learn to use a dedicated editor for demonstrating
laboratory experiments. This editor is based on the concept of
VR Nuggets [26]. The basic idea of VR Nuggets is that they are
standalone, always functioning VR software components to be
used for education purposes. The VR Nuggets provide all the
complex base functionality for a certain use pattern, e.g., the
show and tell pattern where a virtual object can be interactively
explored in 3D together with labels that provide additional infor-
mation. If the student group aims to demonstrate a certain lab
device, they need to select the matching VR Nugget and change
its configuration, i.e., substitute the existing dummy virtual object
with the specific object from an asset store and place the labels
in 3D space accordingly. The VR Nugget software makes sure that
the labels are always positioned in the virtual world that they
are readable by the students and provides interaction techniques
for exploration. VR Nuggets are not meant for creating a whole
course in VR but to support the introduction of some VR content
in a regular course where VR has a substantial added value. The
student groups have two weeks to create the VR content and
prepare the demo at their station. Hence, the software used must
allow for a short familiarization period. In phase 4, the event is
conducted. The event takes 120 min (tsetup = 10 minutes, 18
demo sessions with t = 5 minutes, tend = 10 minutes, two breaks
with tbreak = 5 minutes) and is short enough that there is no need
for a split. In phase 5, the students are expected to write some
text about the outcome as part of their usual lab report. Because
of time constraints, no specific activities were conducted during
course time for phase 6. Instead, students were just encouraged
to discuss their experiences within the group and to take some
time and reflect on them.
The fourth example illustrates how our method can be mod-
ified during the time of the COVID-19 pandemic and how it
could translate to distance learning. If presence at the university
is not feasible at all, of course, first-hand experiences cannot
be made to the same extent as if the event in phase 4 can
be held in a face-to-face setting in a VR-Lab. The major idea
here is to use a web conferencing tool such as Zoom, Webex, or
Microsoft Teams that all allows to divide the participants into
smaller groups and hold sessions in parallel. In these sessions,
either the demonstrator remotely instructs the participants and
navigates them through the demo provided the VR/AR equipment
is available at the participants’ site. Or the presenter gives a
description of the experience in a one-to-one session where a
higher degree of empathy can be feasible as a dialogue between
presenter and participants arises. Here, the idea is to approximate
a hands-on experience as well as possible. If the policy of the
university allows it, the VR/AR equipment can be lent to the
students who take it or even have it shipped to their homes.
Alternatively, equipment that might be present in the students’
homes (such as a Playstation VR or a sophisticated smart device
Here, the educator needs to
ave a high degree of flexibility as the planning of tasks cannot be
ccomplished in phase 1 as the information on what equipment
appens to be accessible is not available. In case presence at
he university is feasible as the pandemic policy allows for the
resence of small groups at the university or more generally, if a
lended learning approach is pursued, the event in phase 4 can be
onducted. However, additional time has to be taken into account
uring planning (e.g., more time for disinfections, more time to
witch rooms, more time for breaks due to airing). Moreover,
ore rooms may be needed in parallel. All other phases except
hase 4 can more easily be transferred to distance learning.
The fifth example illustrates the usage of coupling points in
ur method. As course A, we take our undergraduate course ‘‘Vir-
ual and Augmented Reality Systems’’ already introduced in ex-
mple 1. As course B, we take a 6th semester course in medicine
here at the end of the semester students should become ac-
uainted with modern methods of digitalization. Course B has
oughly 70 students. The students in course A are tasked with
reparing VR/AR demonstrations in medicine and interviewing
he participants about the added value they see in using these
echnologies and their attitude towards VR/AR. All five groups in
ourse A are provided with dedicated software for medicine that
ses VR/AR in order to visualize data from radiology in 3D. All
roups had the same task. The time for a demo session is set to
0 min. Each student from course B visits only one of the five
tations. The event was split to three consecutive weeks. Thus,
t the end of the lecture of course B, a third of the students,
f course, B took part in the event. There were 14 sessions in
otal, i.e., up to five sessions per week where a student had to
ait up to 40 min until they had a spot at one of the five demo
tations. In course A, a second event was performed where this
ime, students visited the demos of the other four groups. This
ay, students were able to see how the other groups responded
o the same task and planned the demonstration during phase
. Moreover, they were also able to compare their evaluation
esults from interviewing the students from course B and see the
ariations of the data among groups.
. Evaluation
In teaching a VR/AR course for computer scientists in a univer-
ity (see example 1 in the previous section), we have employed
he circuit parcours technique seven times (in the period from
009 to 2020). We have never experienced any problem with
pplying this technique that resulted in a failure. The technique
roved itself to be robust and working well. Students particularly
ppreciated the event-like character and the variation in teaching
ethods. In five out of seven cases, the students voluntarily or-
anized additional events and invited fellow students and friends
r family. We take this as a strong indication that students felt
otivated and were well engaged. In our universities’ quality
ssurance where all courses are evaluated with a standard ques-
ionnaire, our VR/AR course was rated well above average. While
his is not necessarily due to the circuit parcours technique, writ-
en comments in the evaluation questionnaire (that highlighted
he practical and hands-on experiences as valuable or mentioned
he event as fun) provide some anecdotal evidence that this
pproach to organizing the course was perceived as positive.
here was not a single negative comment referring explicitly to
he circuit parcours technique in all seven questionnaires.
We also surveyed the students where we used our methods
n the last four years. We received 15 answers. We asked the
ormer students to rate the importance of making a hands-on
xperience in a course about VR and AR on a scale from 0
not important) to 6 (highly important). The result is shown in8
Fig. 4. Results of the survey ‘‘From your experience, how important is it to
make hands-on experiences in courses about VR and AR?’’ on a scale from 0
(not important) to 6 (highly important).
Fig. 4 there is a clear trend in this group that rates hands-on
experiences as important. Moreover, we got written statements
from the comments field in our survey. Only a few addressed
hands-on experiences directly, e.g., ‘‘Trying out a VR program
with VR goggles is more authentic’’. Most statements addressed
other aspects of our methods. Several of them state that the
opportunity to experience more variety was appreciated: ‘‘[It is
an advantage to] see different approaches to the implementation
of the projects and user testing’’., ‘‘You can see how the others
have implemented the user tests’’, ‘‘[It is an advantage to] to see
more cool ideas (or their implementation)’’, ‘‘[It is an advantage
to] try out other VR headsets’’.. Here, former students highlight
the ability for comparison: ‘‘[It is an advantage] in order not only
to be able to evaluate the work of fellow students but also to get
a comparison to your own work’’., ‘‘You can see how much the
others have done, and how much you could have done’’., ‘‘Others
were a bit more creative and brave to try something different
than required’’. Statements show that empathy is addressed by
our methods: ‘‘You get a better understanding of the subject’s
situation (e.g., what might stress a subject or make them uncom-
fortable) when you do another user test yourself’’., ‘‘How different
people’s views and approaches can be, even when studying the
same thing’’., ‘‘Cool event, people perceive very different aspects
of the demo’’.. Moreover, one statement shows that our methods
can encourage reflection: ‘‘One reflects on the usability of one’s
own application for future implementations’’.. The opportunity
to receive feedback is mentioned in several statements, such as
‘‘Feedback for one’s own work is extremely useful’’.. Here, the
former students show that taking over teaching tasks can be
considered positively: ‘‘[It is an advantage] To enable feedback
to fellow students’’, ‘‘I have been helped, so I return that too’’.
Former students offered the following advice: ‘‘It was good that
we have scheduled substitutes to perform the tests’’., ‘‘That you
should take enough time for the test person and that it is also
okay if the user test does not run exactly as planned beforehand’’..
While these statements are not representative, they show the
potential of our methods to help in the acquisition of soft skills.
8. Discussion
8.1. Advantages and disadvantages
Concerning the time and effort challenge, the circuit parcours
technique is superior to a linear demonstration of VR/AR appli-
cations by the educator alone. While the latter takes at least
n · k · t minutes of time for demonstrations, our technique takes
less than 1/kth of that time. For instance, in example 1 a linear
Our technique is a solution for the
ducator being a bottleneck in demonstrations (i.e. an aspect of
he supervision challenge). On the other hand, additional time
eeds to be invested by the students for the preparation. How-
ver, here groups of students can work in parallel. Moreover,
he students can reap benefits from the preparation in addition
o the benefits of experiencing the demonstration. The circuit
arcours technique also ensures that idle or waiting time for
tudents is reduced. They are active and involved, either as partic-
pants, presenters, or observers (which addresses the bottleneck
hallenge).
The presented technique does not only mitigate the prob-
em that individual hands-on experiences take time and space
i.e., mitigating the time and effort challenge as well as the space
hallenge). Moreover, the educator is relieved of the tedious task
o oversee every demonstration which might be even mandatory
ecause of safety considerations (e.g., tripping hazards when
tudents wear HMD that do not let them perceive the environ-
ent). In addition, the educator is not required to fully plan and
repare the demonstration (install software, create or customize
he demonstration, set up the hardware equipment). In a sense,
he students take over some work of the educator which provides
earning opportunities to them. As a consequence, the significant
verall reduction of the educator’s workload could mean that
he inclusion of individual hands-on experiences in a course can
ecome feasible in the first place. In this case, our technique
as all the advantages that come with hands-on experience as
pposed to just hearing or reading about VR/AR experiences. We
ave not evaluated the extent and scope of these advantages
urther as they are not specific to our technique but the provision
f individual experiences in VR/AR education in general. Our tech-
ique is rather an enabling factor in this situation. For instance,
e did not evaluate the added value of first-hand experiences in
R/AR education with an experiment that had a control group.
owever, this is examined in the literature and our experiences
onfirm findings that first-hand experiences are crucial for the
nderstanding of VR/AR.
Enlisting students to conduct VR/AR presentations might be
een as inferior to the educator performing this task as the pre-
entation abilities, didactical competencies, or verbal capabilities
f the students might not be as well-developed compared to the
ducator. However, the first-hand experiences each student is
ble to make with VR/AR even with an inexperienced student
resenter instead of an experienced educator are valuable. This
s especially true if the choice is not between inexperienced
tudent presenter vs. experienced educator but between first-
and experience vs. no first-hand experience because limited
esources and other constraints can force the educator to abandon
he idea to provide first-hand experiences in VR/AR. Based on
nlisting students, the circuit parcours technique can again be
een as enabling factor for first-hand experiences and solution
or the access challenge. Moreover, the student presenters con-
eive and rehearse their presentation within their group during
he preparation phase. Here, the group members can provide
aluable feedback. The educator can also use the preparation
hase to perform some quality assurance of the presentations
nd demonstration protocols before the event phase, especially
f the educator takes the role of a pilot user. The concrete task
o act as presenter can be a good occasion to motivate students
o work on their presentation skills and didactical competencies.
ence, the educator should consider providing fitting learning
pportunities (such as instructional videos or even a compact
ourse about relevant soft skills also addressing the educator
roficiency challenge).9
An additional advantage of the circuit parcours technique lies
in the fact that students do not just experience k demonstra-
tions. They invest significantly more time and effort in the one
demonstration that they are responsible for. As a result, a good
balance can be struck between getting an overview and getting to
know one example more in-depth (which is also a contribution
to addressing the procurement challenge). Moreover, the tech-
nique enlists the learners as tutors for their fellow students. This
provides opportunities in learning soft skills and can also have
motivational aspects that their work is rewarded with support-
ing and educating others. There may be additional motivational
aspects based on the high degree of active involvement, the work
in groups, or the event character.
A disadvantage of our methods is that they are still more
demanding to the educator than just showing a video on a slide.
Educators need to perform meticulous planning as especially
the event is highly sensitive to delays or other disturbances.
In principle, handing groups of students not the same task but
different ones opens the door for unequal treatment (e.g., dif-
ferences in workload requested as one group task may turn out
to be considerably more challenging than the tasks of the other
groups). Our methods provide only a framework that needs to
be tailored to the individual learning goals of a course and the
constraints (e.g., availability of equipment). The need for the first-
hand experience wanes if the students have already extensive
experience in VR and AR usage. Here, other advantageous aspects
of our methods could still make their application sensible.
8.2. Pedagogical considerations
From our experience, the circuit parcours technique allows us
to address more learning goals with the opportunity not only to
hear about but to experience VR/AR hardware and software:
• The students are trained to be attentive and observe VR/AR
users actively.
• The students switch the roles of presenter and participant
and thus improve social skills such as empathy.
• Students learn to self-assess their performance when com-
paring their work to the work of other students.
• Students learn about presentations and especially the
demonstration of VR/AR applications to third parties.
• Time management and discipline in carrying out a demo or
test protocol can be trained.
• The methods provide opportunities to be creative and learn
how these creations are experienced by others.
• With the peer teaching aspect included in our method, stu-
dents learn how to facilitate the learning process of others.
• Fundamentals of user tests can be also learning objectives,
e.g., the circuit parcours technique facilitates the recording
of test data in a short amount of time that can serve as a
basis for further analysis. In particular, meaningful statisti-
cal analysis requires a minimum amount of test data. This
amount can be obtained in the event phase.
9. Conclusion and future work
The circuit parcours technique describes a basic pattern for
best practice how hands-on VR and AR demonstrations can be
integrated into a course about VR and AR. The major idea is to
define several demonstration stations that are used in parallel
during a carefully organized event. Moreover, students switch
roles as participants and presenters. Thus, students are not only
recipients of the demonstrations but are entrusted with preparing
and actively presenting VR and AR applications. This relieves
educators from time-consuming tasks that are associated with
The central event is
mbedded in a six-phase model: outline, assignment, preparation,
vent, presentation, and reflection. Moreover, inner and outer
terations, as well as coupling points, can serve as means to build
robust framework for learning experiences that even transcend
he boundaries of a single course. By comparing time efforts with
raditional demonstration approaches, it can be shown that the
resented technique is significantly more time-efficient. Besides
ime efficiency and the reduction of the workload of the presen-
er, the methods have additional potential advantages such as the
bility to address several learning goals ranging from several soft
kills (time management, presentation skills, etc.) to user test-
ng or VR/AR programming, the increase in student motivation,
nd the balance between in-depth learning and provision of an
verview. As a result, obstacles are mitigated by this technique
hat could prevent educators to include a hands-on demonstra-
ion of VR/AR in their courses such as the bottleneck challenge
r the supervision challenge. Thus, a major advantage is that the
echnique contributes to providing students the opportunity to
xperience VR and AR applications themselves instead of just
eading, hearing, or seeing a video about them. These experiences
re considered to be of key importance when learning about
R and AR. Describing five different application examples of the
ircuit parcours technique, we showed how flexible the technique
an be used in different situations that range from semester-long
ourses to one-day seminars, from specialist target groups such
s computer science students to non-technical specialists, from
ourses with few participants to courses with a large number of
articipants. This leads to one direction for future work where
urther techniques for teaching can be derived from the technique
resented exploiting the potential of the coupling points within
he phase model presented. Another direction for future work
ould be to provide a dedicated authoring tool for preparing
emonstrations for the circuit parcours technique and an envi-
onment for content creation. Here, the VR nugget approach can
erve as a promising starting point.
eclaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
ial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
o influence the work reported in this paper.