Animate materials, man-made materials behaving like living systems, are attracting enormous interest across 
a range of sectors, from construction and transport industry to medicine. In this leading opinion article, we 
propose that embracing complexity in biomaterials design offers untapped opportunities to create biomaterials 
with innovative life-like properties that extend their capabilities and unleash new paradigms in medical treatment. 
Biology is full of beautiful examples of remarkable structures and
omplex phenomena made and regulated by multiple molecular and cel-
ular building blocks interacting cooperatively through controlled mech-
nisms that give rise to sophisticated properties and materials [ 1 , 2 ].
rom the toughness and resilience of silk or resilin to the effective cat-
lytic functions of enzymes at the molecular scale; from the locomo-
ive properties of kinesin and dynein to the dynamic disorder-to-order
ransitions of membraneless organelles at the nanoscale scale; from the
esponsive coordinated migration of and communication between cells
uring development to the way organisms such as the salamander are
ble to regrow lost limbs at the micro and macroscale. Independently of
he size scale at which one looks, biological systems inspire us. In doing
o, it is easy to mistake their remarkable reproducibility and efficiency
or simplicity. In fact, biology is anything but simple, and it is its inher-
nt complexity in the way biological systems grow, respond, diversify,
nd optimize that give rise to their outstanding properties. 
rogresses in biomaterials design 
Biomaterials have improved healthcare in many ways and continu-
us developments in the field are expected to lead to breakthrough solu-
ions for many clinical problems. While initially designed to be passive
 i.e. biologically inert to minimize immune responses) and restore the
asic functions of the tissues being replaced by matching their mechan-
cal properties [3] , increasing control over chemical functionality and∗ Corresponding authors. 
E-mail addresses: h.azevedo@qmul.ac.uk (H.S. Azevedo), A.Mata@nottingham.ac.
f  
ttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbiosy.2022.100039 
eceived 26 November 2021; Received in revised form 23 January 2022; Accepted 6
666-5344/© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access 
 http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) esulting properties have led to an explosion in diversity and potential
pplications of biomaterials [ 3 , 4 ]. Furthermore, as our understanding
f how biological systems function has increased, so has the pursuit for
iomaterials that can mimic their properties. A common thread in this
xtensive biomaterial landscape has been the search of reductionist ap-
roaches, which have been largely imposed by practical, economic and
egulatory constraints to afford reproducible manufacturing and facili-
ate clinical translation. For example, testing biomaterials by undertak-
ng cell culture in 2D, rather than 3D, benefits higher throughput but
ails to recreate the in vivo environment, removes critical system interac-
ions, and introduces dimensionality artefacts. However, simplicity has
lso enabled the biomaterials community to dissect the inherent com-
lexity of biological systems [5] and lay down underlying principles and
esign rules [6] to attempt to recreate them. Pioneering studies have
enerated examples of biomaterial systems capable of growing, divid-
ng and multiplying, self-healing, and exhibiting hierarchical structures.
onetheless, these approaches have mainly used single components or
nabled the recreation of single properties ( e.g. composition, stiffness,
hape, topography, degradability, ligand density) [4] . 
In spite of remarkable advances, we are far from developing practical
aterials that can emulate the vast majority of complex functions ex-
ibited by living systems [6] . In fact, there is a growing frustration that
aterials science has not delivered the kinds of practical breakthroughs
hat have been expected [6] . There is a need for new paradigms that can
ush the current boundaries that guide, yet also limit, materials design.
n doing so, it is helpful to realize that we have evolved to pursue order
nd symmetry and to avoid chaos and disorder. Our natural proclivity
or simplification has enabled remarkable advances in materials scienceuk (A. Mata). 
 February 2022 
article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
H.S. Azevedo and A. Mata Biomaterials and Biosystems 6 (2022) 100039 
Here, we argue that embrac-
ng complexity, rather than avoiding it, can lead to new ways of think-
ng about biomaterials design. This approach does not have to replace
inimalistic strategies but rather offers opportunities to complement
nd enhance them. The need for embracing and engineering complex-
ty is increasingly being recognized in fields expanding from precision
edicine [7] to biofabrication [8] . 
pen challenges and opportunities in biomaterials design 
In this perspective, we argue that new ways of thinking about ma-
erials design could offer solutions to major unmet needs. For example,
he fields of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine continue to
ace gruelling challenges because of the difficulty of recreating the in-
erent complexity of the regenerative milieu. Biology is complex and
inimalistic approaches to recreate it can only go so far. However, given
he increasing understanding of underlying biological principles and ca-
acity to manipulate molecules, new opportunities are emerging. How
ar these go may depend on our capacity to think outside conventional
onceptual boundaries and operate at the interface of traditionally un-
elated fields such as for example structural biology and biofabrication
r supramolecular chemistry and mechanobiology. 
aterials design through biological organization principles 
Like biological systems, chemical systems can exhibit complex
ehaviour that emerges from cooperative interactions and chemical
etworks formed by multiple components, not observed in isolated
olecules or reactions [9] . These interactions enable both functional-
ty of individual components ( e.g. protein disorder-order transitions) as
ell as the emergence of mechanisms of assembly that nature uses to
iversify, respond, and ultimately optimize. Embracing complexity in
iomaterials will require a similar holistic approach that considers a
ystems-level design and integrates interdependent parts ( Fig. 1 ), briefly
iscussed in the following sub-sections. 
elf-assembly and multicomponent self-assembly 
Biological systems rely on self-assembling processes that have high-
evel of organization across scales, and which are specific, selective,
nd adaptable. Reductionist approaches have enabled the generation
f remarkable materials such as those based on self-assembling pep-
ides. However, self-assembling systems that integrate multiple types of
uilding-blocks can amplify interactions and facilitate the generation of
mergent and innovative properties that go beyond those of individual
omponents. In fact, biology builds by integrating and coordinating mul-
iple molecular building-blocks. The use of multiple molecular compo-
ents can significantly enhance the diversity of the resulting structures
hus avoiding limits on the emergence of complexity that homogeneity
mposes. 
isorder-to-order transitions 
We have evolved to pursuit order and avoid disorder. However, liv-
ng systems operate within a balance of order and disorder that enables
oth stability and growth. This is particularly clear when looking at
roteins. It is becoming increasingly recognised that proteins function
s a network and that their interactions with one another determine
heir activity. There is growing consensus that the disordered regions
f proteins play a key structural and signalling role in protein function,
hrough interactions with other molecules, facilitated by their confor-
ational flexibility [10] . 2 ompartmentalization and diffusion-reaction processes 
As multiple components interact, supramolecular structures emerge.
n biological systems, interactions between different molecules and
isorder-to-order transitions can lead to the emergence of distinct com-
artments that trigger downstream events such as diffusion or the gen-
ration of gradients, which lead to dynamic behaviours such as growth
nd healing. Complex patterns, such as animal skin patterns and skele-
al shapes in vertebrate limbs, are widely observed in biology. Pattern
ormation is driven by concentration gradients regulated by reaction-
iffusion mechanisms. Morphogenesis and hierarchical organization
ave been achieved in synthetic chemical systems through reaction-
iffusion systems ( e.g. compartmentalization via a semi-permeable bar-
ier/membrane) that produce concentration differences between differ-
nt chemical environments which evolve into spatio-temporal patterns.
ar-from equilibrium systems and emergence of properties 
In living systems, molecular assemblies are regulated by compet-
tive chemical (anabolic or catabolic) reaction networks that control
he activation and deactivation of their precursors. For assemblies to
merge and breakdown over time, the anabolic and catabolic reactions
ust be regulated independently. Initially, the rate of the anabolic reac-
ion needs to be higher than the catabolic reaction to favour temporary
ccumulation of precursors to promote their assembly, but then self-
ssembly can be maintained in a steady state when the rate constants of
ssembly and disassembly are equal. The microenvironment affects the
inetics of the reaction cycle, influencing the assembly propensity. Fur-
hermore, the interplay between assembly and reaction cycles can gener-
te oscillations in the assembling and disassembling processes, trigger-
ng transient order and resulting in pattern formation and assemblies
ith dynamic behaviour. Dynamic self-assembling systems require con-
inuous energy supply to sustain their maintenance so assembly will
top when the fuel is completely used or when the rate of the catabolic
eaction takes control over the reaction cycle. 
Living systems exhibit properties that go beyond those of the indi-
idual building-blocks that compose them. Independently of size scale,
iological structures display properties such as adaptation, replication,
ugmentation, or the capacity to grow and heal that emerge upon in-
eractions between the components that form them. By emulating or in-
orporating biological organization principles within materials design,
t is possible to move away from limits that homogeneity imposes and,
nstead, trigger and control emergent properties. 
eyond bioinspiration – biocooperative materials 
Interest in bioinspired materials has grown for decades because of
he remarkable advantages that structures and properties of biological
aterials could offer. Advances in fields such as structural and synthetic
iology, supramolecular chemistry, and biofabrication continue to grow
ur toolkit to engineer synthetic materials that emulate features of bio-
ogical ones. However, given the inherent complexity of biology, it is
mportant to also explore other avenues that can facilitate access to
he properties of natural materials. For example, the possibility to work
ith endogenous molecules and assembling mechanisms of living sys-
ems could offer an attractive alternative to reach this goal. 
inal remarks 
The realization of biomaterials that function as those in living sys-
ems requires an inclusion of complexity that exploits heterogenous
uilding blocks and emerging phenomena. This approach enables the in-
orporation of collective interactions and assembly of cooperative struc-
ures, as well as exogenous interventions for kinetic control and dynamic
ehaviour. This new generation of biomaterials has the potential to push
urrent boundaries in materials performance and drive major changes
H.S. Azevedo and A. Mata Biomaterials and Biosystems 6 (2022) 100039 
Fig. 1. Proposed holistic approach to integrate complexity in biomaterials design harnessing supramolecular biological organization principles that nature has 
evolved as assembling rules for materials design. Adapted from [8] with permission.