The earliest cast iron in China dates to the 8th century BC and pre-dates the earliest European evidence by 
about two millennia. The invention of cast iron smelting is closely related to the pre-existing and contemporary 
technologies of casting bronze and firing ceramics as well as the social and political context of early 1st millennium 
BC China. A series of early iron smelting furnaces were surveyed, excavated, and scientifically analysed. However, 
in order to understand how cast iron was initially produced, the evidence from one of the earliest production 
sites was digitally simulated. This modelling allowed different potential methods for the underlying production 
technology to be evaluated. The explanation for the invention of cast iron lies both in borrowing and developing 
of techniques found in other contemporary pyrotechnologies as well as a contemporary systemic philosophical 
approach.
The independent invention of cast iron production in China in the 8th
entury BC predated the earliest European evidence of cast iron produc-
ion by about two millennia. The earliest cast iron pieces were found
n Tianma-Qucun  -  cemetery in Shanxi   province, dating to
he 8th century BC ( Han, 2000 ) and in a tomb in Liuhe  county in
iangsu province, dating to the mid 8th century BC ( Nanjing, 1974 ).
he microstructures of the artefacts showed that they were white cast
ron, which was too brittle to use on a large scale. It was not until the
th century BC that the innovation of an annealing process allowed the
rittleness of cast iron to be decreased as demonstrated by the adzes
nd hoes excavated at Luoyang  in Henan  province, comprising
hite cast iron in the core with the decarburized layer of steel on the
urface ( Han, 2013 ). Although the beginning of iron technology in China
s still an issue far from clear, the invention of cast iron production oc-
urs after the introduction of iron bloomery production into northwest
hina probably from the Eurasian steppe. This is evidenced by an iron
ar excavated from Mogou  cemetery, Lintan  county, Gansu 
province made from carburized bloomery iron and shaped by forg-
ng, dating to the 14th century BC ( Chen, 2013 ) as well as the bloomery
ron artefacts unearthed from Yanbulake  cemetery at Hami 
, Xinjiang  region, dating to c.1300 BC ( Qian, 2002 ). These dates
re contemporary with the earliest iron objects and iron bloomery pro-
uction in Europe ( Pleiner, 2000 ), which presents a fundamental ques-∗ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: qianwei@ustb.edu.cn (W. Qian). 
ttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.aia.2021.04.001 
eceived 7 April 2021; Accepted 17 April 2021 
vailable online 3 May 2021 
667-1360/© 2021 University of Science and Technology Beijing. Publishing service
ccess article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ion. Why and how was cast iron technology invented and developed in
hina so much earlier than in Europe? 
Cast iron is a high carbon iron alloy produced mostly in blast fur-
ace with a wide range of compositions, which are defined as contain-
ng more than 2.1%, and usually less than about 4.5% carbon. It will be
ade whenever a bloomery furnace smelting iron ore is operated with
oo low a ratio of ore to carbon in the charge for the combustion air rate.
teel made by decarburising cast iron is more durable than bloomery
teel because it contains fewer inclusions, and the productivity of the
last furnace is much greater than that of the bloomery furnace. As the
arbon content of iron is increased, its initial solidification temperature
ecreases, for example, at 2.1% carbon it is 1380°C and at 4.3% car-
on 1150 °C, the latter being not far above the melting point of copper
t 1083°C. Solidification takes place in two different modes. One is as
hite cast iron that contains the carbon entirely as the compound iron
arbide (cementite), which is hard and brittle. The other is as grey cast
ron caused by the sufficient quantity silicon helping the carbide to de-
ompose during solidification to carbon as graphite and ferrite, which
s strong and little ductile. If white cast iron containing a moderate con-
ent of silicon is heated and held at temperatures between 800 °C and
000 °C in an atmosphere low in oxidizing potential, such as in a closed
ontainer, the primary cementite decomposes into iron and free carbon
 Rehder, 2000 ). Annealing the cast iron – a process practiced in China
rom at least the 5th century BC – greatly facilitated the production of
ools and weapons. s by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open 
by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) 
Fig. 1. Reconstruction of No. 6 furnace at Tonglushan copper smelting site 
( Lu, 1981 ) (1.Base 2. Wind tunnel 3. Metal tapping hole 4. Slag tapping hole 
5. Tuyère 6. lining 7. Operation platform 8. Furnace wall 9. Original ground). 
This paper presents not only an archaeological survey of the evidence
or early cast iron production in blast furnaces, but also a simulation
odel analysing the distribution of the fluid and the temperature to ex-
lore how this invention was achieved. It also explores the relationship
etween cast iron and the pre-existing and contemporary pyrotechnolo-
ies relating to ceramics and bronze in China. 
he reasons of the invention of cast iron 
Social demands are the main reason why an invention was devel-
ped in a large scale. The increasing population pressure needs more
eveloping agriculture and military technology and materials. 
The early invention of cast iron smelting and the subsequent innova-
ions, including fining, puddling and a range of other techniques, meant
hat iron production and trade had a very different economic and polit-
cal significance in China from that in the West ( Wagner, 2008 ). In the
econd half of the 1st millennium BC, a growing population in China
ombined with increasing agricultural productivity. The use of harder
nd heavier cast iron ploughs enabled a substantial increase and effec-
iveness in the ploughing of soils leading to greater productivity in agri-
ulture. 
The other main use of cast iron is in military weapons in this period of
ncreasing conflict – those of steel could be easily and amount obtained
nd produced by decarburised cast iron. China was divided into several
arts during the Spring and Autumn Period (770-476 BC), even in the
arring States Period (475-221 BC). The frequently happened wars be-
ween states required much more new cheap materials to replace the
xpensive copper and bronze weapons. Bloomery iron weapons were
sed in China early in 9th century, but the low productivity of bloomers
ad to be replaced by the cast iron smelters several centuries later, who
ould produce much more economic decarburised steel weapons. 
Economically, iron can replace copper and become the most im-
ortant metal material because the resource of iron ores is much
arger amount than the other metals except aluminium in this globe
 Maddin, 2002 ). Bronze became rarer and more expensive due to the tin
inerals (cassiterite) being almost exhausted during this period, leav-
ng cast iron to be the most important substitute. Once cast iron was
nvented and developed in China, it became a strategic material like
alt that was not freely traded and transmitted outside for longer than
 millennium, hence the cast iron technology was not transferred into
urope so easily, which might be one of the reasons why cast iron was
ot produced in Europe until the 13th century AD. 
Besides of the social context, more technical reasons will be discussed
s followed. The Chinese word taoye  means to make potteries and
etals, and refers also to the process by which students’ and citizens’
ind and characters are developed. This shows a close relationship be-
ween tao  (pottery making) and ye  (metallurgy). 
The earliest evidence for the firing of pottery dates to about 20,000
P and was found in Xianrendong  cave in Wannian  ,
iangxi   province ( Wu, 2012 ) and provides one of the earliest
ources of evidence for pyrotechnology in East Asia. The control of the
ring atmosphere is evidenced by the production of grey and black pot-
ery at latest by 6000BC. The development of pottery firing techniques
eant that there were respective kiln rooms and fire chambers, allow-
ng the temperature to rise up to 1100 °C using the natural wind prior to
000 BC. The innovation of a chimney on the pottery kiln in the 8th–9th
entury BC enabled higher temperature in the firing chamber as shown
y the glazed pottery in Zhangjiapo   site in Shaanxi   province
here firing was demonstrated to have reached 1200 °C and therefore
otentially relates to the origins of porcelain ( Zhou, 1960 ). 
However, the production of cast iron not only requires high temper-
tures, it also requires a blast furnace. It is in copper smelting furnaces
hat the technical origins can be found. The excavated copper smelting
urnaces are mostly with tuyères on the lower part of the furnace wall.
 shaft furnace was unearthed at Tonglushan  site, Daye  in
ubei  province, dating to the 7th to 5th century BC. The recon-5 truction furnace size comprised 0.5 m in diameter, 1.5 m in height and
bout 0.3 m 
3 in volume. The furnace consisted of base, hearth and bosh
arts, with blowing, tapping and slag holes ( Lu, 1981 , Fig. 1 ). The differ-
nt refractory layers of the furnace indicated the smelters had grasped
he characters of different technical ceramics at that time. Metallurgi-
al research on the products from the Tonglushan site showed that the
ast iron prills as a by-product were involved in the copper smelting slag,
hich implied strongly reducing smelting conditions while probably us-
ng local chalcopyrite (CuFeS 2 ) ore. The analysis of the copper ingots
ound in the No. 4 furnace and the nearby Daye Lake‘¤‘§‘†‘¶‘¹‘–showed
here are more than 5% iron in them ( Zhu, 1986 ). The profile of the ex-
avated shaft furnace structure preceded the invention of the later cast
ron smelting furnace. 
Three iron weapons with bronze or jade handles were excavated at
he Guo State cemetery in Sanmenxia , Henan province, dat-
ng to the 9th century BC, represent the earliest bloomery iron in central
hina ( Han, 1998 ), and demonstrate the beginning of the long process
or iron smelting technology, while the local copper smelting and bronze
asting traditions had been developed for several centuries. A crucial
onnection is the tradition in copper and bronze metallurgy of pouring
he molten metal into a mould. The desire to replicate this process in
ron led the craftspeople to seek a kind of new metal with a relatively
ow melting point. Now we know the use of an iron carbon alloy with
About 4% content carbon had a melting point only about 100–200 °C
igher than that of copper and enabled the production of cast iron. 
Annealing technology was another related pyrotechnology compact-
ng on cast iron. It was grasped by Chinese at least in the 5th century
C. Annealing enabled cast iron to become more useful, which helped
he Chinese develop the technological path of casting more easily in or-
er to manufacture agricultural implements and tools, in contrast to the
ron bloomery techniques in other civilisations. Without the annealing
rocess after smelting, cast iron was regarded as the waste of bloomery
rocess in the West during the first millennium BC, while the Chinese
eveloped the cast iron foundry system under annealing technology. 
rchaeological survey for iron smelting furnaces 
A blast furnace is a shaft furnace in which cast iron is produced from
re. Ore, fuel (charcoal), and a flux (normally limestone) are charged
eriodically into the top of the shaft, an air blast is blown continuously
nto tuyères near the bottom, and iron and slag are periodically tapped
ut at the bottom. The operation continues for days, weeks, months and
ven years. It could be operated continuously until the furnace refrac-
ory failed. Cast iron could be obtained in simple economies with differ-
nt scales of operation. 
In our opinion, the key to making Chinese cast iron is in the operation
f blast furnaces. It is fundamental to find more ancient blast furnaces
nd record the outlines of different kinds of furnaces. Although there
re a few texts or illustrations describing the iron smelting furnaces to
roduce molten cast iron, they are too simple to be very useful and date
nly to the 14th century AD. 
Iron smelting technology developed rapidly in ancient China, where
 large amount of smelting sites have been found, though there was
arely an archaeological report on the furnaces before 1950. At the
reat Leap Forward period in the late 1950s, several iron smelting sites
ated before the 8 th century AD were excavated, such as Tieshenggou 
 in Gongxian  ( Henan, 1960 ), Xiadian  site in Linru 
 Ni, 1960 ), Henan province, and Liguoyi   site in Jiangsu  
rovince ( Nanjing, 1960 ). These blast furnaces provided preliminary
nowledge for the researchers. In the 1970s, more sites were excavated
uch as Guxing  site in Zhengzhou , Wangchenggang  site
n Lushan  , Henan province, which yielded abundant information for
ncient iron smelting ( Henan, 1978 ). In the 1980s, a handful of furnaces
t important sites including Xiping  in Henan province (Henan,
994), Laiwu  in Shandong province ( Taian, 1989 ), Wuan  in
ebei province ( Li, 2016 , Wang, 2017 ), Nanzhao  in Henan province
 Han, 2007 ), were excavated or archaeologically investigated. In the
1st century, a series of new smelting furnaces were found, some of
hich are excavated in Biyang  in Henan province ( Henan, 2009 ),
ujiang  and Qionglai  in Sichuan  province ( (Chengdu, I.
   , 2008) ). There are now 167 furnaces in total men-
ioned in archaeological reports or articles. These furnaces were dated
rom the 4th century BC to 17th century AD. Some sites dating span
ore than one dynasty, especially in the regions where the iron ore
esource was abundant, while some sites consisted of many processing
orkshops such as foundry and forging. 
In order to explore the unknown issues surrounding iron smelting
urnaces in early China, a series of field surveys were carried out with
he aim of revealing new finds and new understandings. In 2009, a group
f teachers and students from the Institute of Historical Metallurgy and
aterials (IHMM), University of Science and Technology Beijing, started
 long-term survey on the iron smelting furnaces throughout China. By
he end of 2012, they investigated about 48 smelting sites, and found 13
ew sites with 22 more furnaces ( Fig. 2 and Table 1 ). Most of the sites
ere dated based on the typology of ceramics unearthed in context, and
bout one third of the sites were dated by using radiocarbon dating.
nfortunately, most of the furnaces are in a badly preserved condition,
ith only a few are preserved well or conserved by the government. 6 During the surveys, samples of tuyères, furnace materials, metals and
lags were collected. Most of them were analysed in the laboratory and
ndicated that they were the remains of cast iron smelting, with the
xception of the samples from Pingnan   in Guangxi  Region. The
ingnan furnaces were seen as bowled shape bloomery furnaces rather
han blast ones. All the furnace sizes were measured carefully for the
uture research and reconstruction. Among them, some furnaces were
ccurately measured using 3D laser scanning technology. It was shown
hat the inner shapes of the hearth and bosh varied rapidly with the
ifferent periods and locations. Furnace materials were made of clays
n Warring States Period (475-221BC) to Han Dynasty (202BC-AD220),
hile it changed to stones after Tang Dynasty (AD 618-907). As the
emand for iron increased, furnaces slowly increased in hearth area and
eight, beyond the ability of human muscle to operate bellows. The
ection of furnaces changed from round in the Warring States Period
o bigger oval ones in Han Dynasty, but round again in Tang and Song
ynasties (AD 960-1279). Another type of small furnace with square
ection appeared in Liao (AD 916-1125) and Jin Dynasties (AD 916-
125) in the northern China. The survey is still ongoing. Due to the
omplexity of the ancient furnaces, more field works and research with
ew technology should be carried on in the future times. 
umerical simulation: a case study of Jiudian furnace 
Judian   furnace at Xiping county in Henan province, dating to the
iddle and late stages in Warring States Period (4th-3rd century BC),
as considered to be the earliest iron smelting furnace in China ( Fig. 3 ).
t was found in 1950s, and excavated in early 1990s. The furnace was
uilt on a slope, with the base, hearth and bosh parts, and the section
f the inner shape was almost round. The remains of the furnace were
.17 m high with a diameter of 0.65–1.06 m, furnace wall width of about
.37 m. The inner wall had glassy slag or other materials adhering to it.
he base was built with charcoal powder, raw sand and clay. A small
earth angle might have been used in the furnace building. It was quite
ifferent to those huge oval Han furnaces like Guxing site. Only charcoal
as used as the fuel (Henan, 1998). This furnace was in the list of the
ey preserved sites of National Cultural Heritage issued in 1996. The
xamination of the slag samples collected nearby showed that it was a
ast iron smelting furnace. Scholars considered that it could produce cast
ron although it was small and simple, for the followed reasons: there
as a wind tunnel on the base of the furnace, which might be similar
o the copper smelting shaft furnace in Tonglushan site (); natural wind
rom this tunnel was strong enough to help the combustion in the hearth;
he wall was built with the re-cast refractory bricks, which could bear
igher temperature ( He, 2009 ). 
During the field work conducted in 2012 and 2013, the furnace re-
earch team from IHMM investigated the site again and measured it
ith 3D laser scanning ( Fig. 4 ). The result showed a very different as-
ect to the furnace ( Fig. 5 ). A long shallow hole of about 3 cm diameter
about 8 cm at the furnace end) was found on the lower hearth part of
he wall, which might be the tuyère for blowing air. The refractory had
ammed clay in regular layers, instead of the bricks mentioned before.
he outline of the furnace was a little different with the hand-drawing.
he height of the remaining furnace is about 2.05 m, while the former
andy measurement showed it was about 2.17 m. 
Precise measurement of the furnace interior was the necessary first
tep in modelling the operating parameters of the furnace. According
o the fieldwork on the other furnaces, it was thought that the wind
unnel did not exist, while the front space might have been made by
emoving the salamander (solidified materials in the hearth of a blast
urnace below the tap hole) out of the blast furnace. The only blowing
ir was blast from the newly found wind hole horizontally. It should
e the tuyère. Then the problem arose. What kind of furnace was used
t that time: bowl or shaft? It could be numerically simulated by the
oftware Fluent on the basis of communicational fluid dynamics (CFD).
aving calculated the pressure and velocity with the airflow delivered
W. Qian and X. Huang Advances in Archaeomaterials 2 (2021) 4–14 
Table 1 
Ancient iron smelting sites found in China (475 BC- AD 1644). 
No. Site Location Dynasty Furnace number Resurvey New finding 
1 Jiudian Xiping, Henan WSP 1 
√
2 Zhenghan Gucheng Xinzheng, Henan WSP 
√
3 Gaocheng Dengfeng, Henan WSP 1 
4 Qi Gucheng Linzi, Shandong WSP to Han 
√
5 Goutouzhao Wugang, Henan WSP to Han 3 
√
6 Zhaizhuang Wugang, Henan WSP to Han 1 
√
7 Xugou Wugang, Henan WSP to Han 
√
8 Yangzhuang Xiping, Henan WSP to Han 
√
9 Fuzhuang Xiping, Henna WSP to Han 
10 Hancheng Yiyang, Henan WSP to Han 
11 Lulou Hebi, Henan WSP to Han 13 
√
12 Handan Handan, Hebei WSP to Han 
13 Xiangcheng Huaibei, Anhui WSP to Han 2 
√
14 Dongpingling Zhangqiu, Shandong Han 4 
√
15 Beiye Jiaozuo, Henan Han 2 
√
16 Wangfangzhuang Nanyang, Henan Han 9 
√
17 Tieshenggou Gongyi, Henan Han 8 
√
18 Guxing Zhengzhou, Henan Han 2 
√
19 Xiadian Linru, Henan Han 1 
20 Wangchenggang Lushan, Henan Han 6 
√
21 Ximalou Lushan, Henan Han 
√
22 Zhangfan Tongbai, Henan Han 
√
23 Xiahewan Biyang, Henan Han 
√
24 Xuecheng Xuecheng, Shandong Han 
25 Qinghe Haidian, Beijing Han 
26 Fengshan Sihong, Jiangsu Han 1 
√
27 Tieniucun Pujiang, Sichuan Han 1 
√
28 Niya Mingfeng, Xinjiang Han 
29 Kuche Kuche, Xinjiang Han 
30 Luopu Luopu, Xinjiang Han 
31 Pozhui, Liuchen Pingnan, Guangxi Han 2 
√
32 Tieshiwei, Dengtang Pingnan, Guangxi Han 6 
√
33 Dinglonggang, Dengtang Pingnan, Guangxi Han 5 
√
34 Liuxueling, Dengtang Pingnan, Guangxi Han 1 
√
35 Jianshuibiao, Dengtang Pingnan, Guangxi Han 1 
√
36 Tieshitang, Damiao Pingnan, Guangxi Han 1 
√
37 Liuzhuochong, Liuchen Pingnan, Guangxi Han 
38 Heshui, Liuchen Pingnan, Guangxi Han 
39 Luoxiu Guiping, Guangxi Han 7 
√
40 Ershijiazi Hohehot, Inner Mongolia Han 16 
41 Liguoyi Tongshan, Jiangsu Han 1 
√
42 Yetao Wuan, Hebei Han 
√
43 Tielugou Linzhou, Henan Han to Tang 9 
√
44 Laiwu Laiwu, Shandong Han to Tang 
√
45 Gushishan Pujiang, Sichuan Han to Song 1 
√
46 Xuxiebian Pujiang, Sichuan Han to Tang 1 
√
47 Pinle Qionglai, Sichuan Tang to Song 2 
√
48 Fanchang Fanchang, Anhui Tang to Song 6 
49 Guishan Fenyi, Jiangxi Tang to Ming 
50 Qiyang Shahe, Hebei Tang to Song 17 
51 Xiacun Nanzhao, Henan Tang to Song 7 
√
52 Jingjicun Wuan, Hebei Tang to Song 3 
√
53 Cuicun Wuan, Hebei Tang to Song 
√
54 Shencun Linzhou, Henan Song 21 
√
55 Zhuzhuang Xintai,Hebei Song 1 
56 Kuangshancun Wuan, Hebei Song 1 
√
57 Liuxi, Longan Xingye, Guangxi Song 3 
58 Maijiehe Jiazuo, Henan Song 1 
√
59 Baotou Baotou, Inner Mogolia Song 1 
√
60 Macun Wuan, Hebei Song 1 
√
61 Hualu, Tongye Anyang, Henan Song to Ming 3 
√
62 Tongan Tongan, Fujian Song to Ming 
63 Shangcang Chicheng, Hebei Liao 
√
64 Shuiquangou Yanqing, Beijing Liao 4 
√
65 Lanqiying Xinlong, Hebei Liao 2 
√
66 Hongshanzhui Luanping, Hebei Liao 
√
67 Bohaiye Luanping, Hebei Liao to Jin 1 
√
68 Acheng Acheng, Heilongjiang Jin 7 
69 Washixia Ruoqiang, Xinjiang Yuan 
70 Tiechang Zunhua, Hebei Ming 2 
√
Note: WSP (Warring States Period) (475-221BC); Han Dynasty (202BC-AD220); Tang Dyansty (AD 618- 907); Song 
Dynasty (AD 960-1279); Liao Dynasty (AD 916-1125); Jin Dyansty (AD 1115-1234); Yuan Dynasty (AD 1271-1368); 
Ming Dynasty (AD 1368-1644).
Fig. 2. Chinese iron smelting sites in different 
dynasties 
(475 BC-AD 618, AD 618-1279, AD 1279- 
1644). 
Fig. 3. The plan (top) and section (bottom) of Jiudian furnace ( Henan, 1998 ). 
Fig. 4. 3D laser scanning on Jiudian furnace. 
human-powered bellows, assumed the outline and the structure of the
urnaces, the construction of flow can be obtained with the software.
urthermore, if the balance of the combustion and chemical reaction
n the furnaces were calculated, the temperature distribution could be
howed, too. The basic procedure and details of the method can be found8 n the recent simulation research on the Shuiquangou site ( Huang, 2012 ,
015 ). 
In this study, we established two kinds of the 3D mesh models of the
urnace internal space: bowl and shaft, and a part of the blast tunnel
n the software GAMBIT according to the 3D laser scanning ( Figure 6
W. Qian and X. Huang Advances in Archaeomaterials 2 (2021) 4–14 
Fig.5. 3D laser scanning result for Jiudian furnace. 
Fig. 6. A reconstruction of the bowl furnace. 
Fig. 7. 3D simulation structure model of bowl furnace. 
Fig. 8. Reconstruction of shaft furnace. 
Fig. 9. 3D Simulation structure model of shaft furnace. 
Assuming that the furnace was full of the
harge of charcoal and ores, a simulation could be done. Before this, a re-
onstruction of shaft type might be more acceptable. The furnace might
e higher with a little hearth angle as well as bosh angle (), according
o the other shaft furnaces in later period. The height of the furnace
as supposed no more than 4.20 m, for the widest waist was located at
bout 40–50% of the whole height of furnace, which is the typical short
nd fat shaft furnace before the 8th century AD ( Huang, 2014 ). 
In the Fluent software, the boundary conditions were set as follows.
he inner wall surfaces such as the furnace wall, blast tunnel wall and
ottom were regarded as wall; blast tunnel inlet was considered as pres-
ure inlet; the furnace top was considered as pressure outlet. The furnace
nternal space was considered as a porous media. 
The blast pressure of the bellows in pre-Qin period could be calcu-
ated by taking a skin bellow which was widely used for iron smelting
efore Tang Dynasty. In a previous study, the blast pressure was cal-
ulated using formula (1), and the maximum value could achieve the9 ange from 103 Pa to 104 Pa ( Huang, 2013 ). 
 = F∕S (1)
(P: blast pressure, F: thrust power, S: area of skin) 
There was an image of skin bellow on the forge iron stone relief
nearth at Hongdaoyuan  in Teng country , Shandong 
rovince, in Han dynasty. It was presumed that the men performing the
lasting were 1.7 m in height ( Fig. 10 ). So the diameter of skin was
.5 m, the area was 0.20 m 
2 , and F was 400 N. Thus, the skin bellow
W. Qian and X. Huang Advances in Archaeomaterials 2 (2021) 4–14 
Fig. 10. A rubbing of the forge iron stone relief 
unearth at Hongdaoyuan in Han dynasty. 
Fig. 11. The charcoal distribution for the low permeability configuration. 
Fig. 12. The charcoal distribution for the high permeability configuration. 
Fig.13. the marks on the furnace wall for Jiudian furnace. 
FLUENT takes the permeability coefficient 1/a and internal loss coef-
cient C 2 as the factors of flow permeability ( Fluent Inc., 2006 ). Ergun’s
quation formula (2) was usually used for the calculation of these fac-
ors. 
= 
𝐷 
2 
𝑝 
150 
𝜀 3 
( 1 − 𝜀 ) 2 
; 𝐶 2 = 
3 . 5 
𝐷 𝑝 
( 1 − 𝜀 ) 
𝜀 3 
(2)
( 𝐷 𝑝 ∶ ) average diameter 𝜀 ∶ air void 
Based on the investigation of similar iron smelting in the 20th cen-
ury, the volume ratio of the charcoal and the ores-flux was nearly 500:1
 Li, 2003 ). For simplicity, 𝐷 𝑃 and 𝜀 could be obtained from the charcoal
n this study. 
In reality, the burden material was piled up randomly. The pores
f the burden material were inter-connected, and their shapes and sizes
aried. In previous study ( Huang, 2015 ), three burden material accumu-
ation configurations were established to simulate the low, high and me-
ian permeability. The first two configurations were extreme cases and
o not exist in real smelting conditions. However, the variation range
f the flow field can be determined by these configurations. In addi-
ion, the most probable situation of the flow field can be determined by
he median configuration. The low and high permeability configuration
ould be calculated by the following geometry model ( Figs. 11 and 12 ).
Because the cross section of the open space between the charcoal
ore was not a circle, the D p can be seen as the hydrodynamic diame-
er (d h ) and calculated according to the minimum size of the charcoal
iameter as formula (3). And the marks on the furnace wall shows that
he charcoal is 4 cm in diameter( Figure Fig.13 ). 
 ℎ 𝑚𝑖𝑛 = 
4s 
𝐶 
= 
( 4 − 𝜋) 𝑑 
𝜋
≈ 0 . 011 m (3)
 ℎ 𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 
4s 
𝐶 
= 
( 16 
3 𝜋
− 1 
)
𝑑 ≈ 0 . 042 m 
( 𝑠 : cross section area of the pore 𝐶:pore section perimeter) 10 The air void ( ε ) can be calculated as follows. The calculation at the
ringing field can be dismissed. For the internal area, the percentage of
he air void was equal to the ratio of the circle and its circumscribed
uboid, as formula (4): 
 min = 
S h − S c 
S h 
≈ 0 . 215 (4)
 max = 411 
Because the charcoal was piled up randomly. The median values
arithmetic mean) of 𝑫 𝑷 and 𝜺 were chosen to represent the probable
onditions in reality. 
 𝒉 𝐦𝐞𝐝 = 0 . 027 , 𝜺 𝐦𝐞𝐝 = 0 . 313 
As result: 
1/a = 3.166 × 10 6, C 2 = 2.904 × 10 3 
In addition to the above calculations, standard k- 𝜀 model was used
o calculate the turbulent viscosity, and the standard SIMPLE algorithm
W. Qian and X. Huang Advances in Archaeomaterials 2 (2021) 4–14 
Fig. 14. Fluid distribution in the full charge 
bowl furnace. 
Fig. 15. Temperature distribution of the bowl 
furnace. 
as used in the pressure-velocity coupling k- 𝜀 . It was shown by the resid-
al plots that convergence results were obtained from the simulations.
or simplicity, only the residual plots of key results are shown. 
The flow field is heavily influenced by temperatures. In the furnace,
he temperature distribution is uneven. According to the ferrous metal-
urgy theory, for the ancient furnace, the temperature is around 1800 K
ear the tuyère, dropping to around 700 K near the furnace top; and the
emperature in the central region is higher than it in the outer region. In
his simulation, in order to make the simulation result of the flow field
ore convincing, the energy equation and a comparing method about
he heat was adopted, by artificial setting of the total temperature of
nlet flow, the number of energy sources of the inner space, and heat
ux of furnace wall (heat loss). After repeated optimization simulation,
he results of the temperature field were basically consistent with facts.
nd the distribution of fluid velocity could be measured along with the
emperature distribution. 
In these conditions, the fluid distribution ( Fig. 14 ) and temperature
istribution ( Fig. 15 ) of the blow furnace was simulated with the soft-11 are Fluent, and got a convergent result. It indicated that the blast was
nly concentrated near the tuyère and it was difficult to blow into other
arts of the furnace. Therefore, the temperatures were seriously inho-
ogeneous in the different parts of hearth and bosh. 
In the same conditions, the fluid distribution ( Fig. 16 ) and temper-
ture distribution ( Fig. 17 ) of the shaft furnace was simulated with the
oftware Fluent, and got a convergent result too. It indicated that the
last was not only concentrated near the tuyère and would flow to the
ther parts of the furnace as a similar velocity, therefore the tempera-
ures were even and well distributed in different parts of base, hearth
nd bosh. 
The comparative simulation showed the same trend that there might
e a higher temperature in the front wall on the other side to the tuyère
han other parts of the wall, which could explain why the front wall
ould be destroyed at the first when the life of the furnace was in their
eadline. The well-distributed fluid and temperature showed the shaft
urnace might be used instead of the bowl one. Although the details of
he furnace wall were not clear in the archaeological excavation, the
W. Qian and X. Huang Advances in Archaeomaterials 2 (2021) 4–14 
Fig. 16. Fluid distribution in full charge shaft 
furnace. 
Fig. 17. Temperature distribution of bowl furnace. 
Simulation could help reconstruct an acceptable outline of the furnace.
o far, the Jiudian furnace might be the earliest blast furnace with the
haft and tuyère unearthed in China. 
iscussion 
Although many smelting sites have been investigated throughout
hina, the evidence for the evolution of the iron smelting furnaces is
till insufficiently clear. There is still a major question to find how and
hy cast iron was invented and developed in China. 
The chemical reaction in the furnace includes the direct and indi-
ect ones with very complicated physical and chemical processes. The
eaction was too complicated to computerise, so these numerical sim-
lations were mainly on the velocity and temperature on the basis of
heoretical models. This would lead the simulated result deviating to12 he correct points. Further work should be done by collecting more
nformation of the process such as the boundary conditions etc. For
nstance, the firing temperature of the refractory and slag could be
seful to compute the inner wall temperature in the models. In this
ase, for the iron smelting process in the furnace was roughly an en-
othermal reaction, the simulated temperature might be a little higher
han the real one. The tendency of the fluid and temperature distri-
utions could obviously help to distinguish which model was more
cceptable. 
A comparative simulation study could give us a clear understanding
f the thermal efficiency of different reactors and how a shaft furnace
ith a little hearth and bosh angles showed better thermal efficiency
han a bowl furnace. That means the iron could be melted into liquid cast
ron at a higher temperature in this kind of shaft furnace - comparable
o a modern blast furnace. This was difficult to obtain in the bloomery
furnace just like the bowl type. This might be one of the key technical
easons why cast iron was invented in China. 
In the case of Jiudian furnace, 3D laser scanning played a very im-
ortant role in the new find of the blowing hole. It was so effective a
ew technology that it was widely used in archaeology and conservation
ork to collect large amount of information in a short time, which was
specially helpful in fieldwork. Though the data treatment for the scan-
ing was not easy, it might be an efficient method to measure the inner
ize of containers or tunnels with complicated shapes such as mines,
ilns and furnaces, which were the main reactors of pyrotechnology. 
Besides the social demands, the technical reasons might be also con-
idered as good explanations for the puzzle of cast iron invention. As a
ajor pyro-technology, cast iron technology shows an obvious relation-
hip with other pyro-technologies such as the manufacture of bloomery
ron, ceramics, copper and bronze. How to control the fire and get high
emperatures efficiently was the main objective for the inventors and in-
ovators. This can be analysed through the techniques of furnace build-
ng which are underpinned by furnace styles and refractory materials.
 furnace was a better reactor than crucible and kiln due to its inner-
urning system and blast blowing. Almost at the same period when cast
ron was invented, porcelain was invented on the basis of glazed pottery,
hile glassmaking was developed in relation to copper metallurgical
lag according to the result of the examination and analysis of the glass
eads unearthed from Kizilur  Cemetery of Baicheng  County
n Xinjiang Region ( Qian, 2010 ). It might not be occasional that such
ryro-technologies were invented and developed almost at the same pe-
iod. The secret of the pyro-technology is the high temperature with
ombustion in a good shape chamber and excellent air blowing. Tech-
iques were borrowed not only from other pyro-technologies, but also
rom other states and communities. Cast iron was invented when the in-
roduced bloomery iron smelting from the west met the local advanced
ronze foundry and copper smelting furnace. 
The history of cast iron informs us that the technology development
ight happen in an open social context so that the technical knowledge
ould be produced and transmitted widely. The cast iron smelting inven-
ion is an example of high harmonious and systemic technical thought in
ncient China. The inherent culture of Chinese technology of he  (har-
onious) led the special way to develop cast iron technology which was
uite different to the West. It can be argued that the invention of cast
ron is one consequence of a distinct philosophical approach to technol-
gy that started in the Western Zhou Dynasty (1046-771BC) and was
ully developed in the Eastern Zhou Dynasty (770-256BC), when a vari-
ty of philosophers such as Confucius flourished. The technical thought
as so different from that of the West that they developed two opposite
ystems of iron smelting and making methods: casting, decarburising
nd annealing in China; bloomery, carburising and forging in the West.
he philosophical approach focussed on the inter-relationships of sys-
em over its structural analysis and the details of the component parts.
 potential analogy can be seen in the contemporary inventions of cast
ron smelting and medical techniques in China. The operators could de-
ide the exact treatment through the changes of flash and slag, just like
he doctors could do through the facial changes in the human body. They
ll believed the inner relations in one system, and paid more attention
o the relations instead of the structure analysis and part details. 
Cast iron and its steel products replaced copper and bronze as the
ost important materials to manufacture the farm implements. By the
ate 4th to 3rd century BC, permanent moulds for casting iron items had
een developed, greatly increasing productivity, the precision of cast-
ng and the capacity to replicate objects such as ploughshare tips. This
an be considered a primitive model of mass production and standardi-
ation. Standard moulds for casting were issued by the iron officials of
he Han dynasty to different foundries. The weapon material was re-
laced by the iron and steel a short time later than the implements.
hese two innovations of tools and weapons enlarged the population
f China rapidly in the second half of the first millennium BC, which
romoted the formation of a unified Chinese Empire. 13 cknowledgements 
This work was based on the field survey and data treatment part-
ered with students Wei Wei, Haifeng Liu, Peifeng Liu, Qili Wang, and
rofessors Rubin Han, Jianli Chen and Yanxiang Li. The Jiudian fur-
ace was under assistance from the Administrative of Cultural Heritages
n Xiping County in Henan Province. It was financially supported by
he Compass Project (No. 20110317 ), the Fundamental Research Funds
or the National Universities (No. FRF-TP-12-003B ) and the NSFC (No.
1374031 ). The authors are indebted to B. W. Roberts on insightful com-
ents and help with the article writing.