The existence of continually increasing concentrations of antibiotics in the environment is a serious
potential hazard due to their toxicity and persistence. Unfortunately, conventional treatment techniques,
such as those utilized in wastewater treatment plants, are not efficient for the treatment of wastewater
containing antibiotic. Recently, algae-based technologies have been found to be a sustainable and
promising technique for antibiotic removal. Therefore, this review aims to provide a critical summary of
algae-based technologies and their important role in antibiotic wastewater treatment. Algal removal
mechanisms including bioadsorption, bioaccumulation, and biodegradation are discussed in detail, with
using algae-bacteria consortia for antibiotic treatment, integration of algae with other microorganisms
(fungi and multiple algal species), hybrid algae-based treatment and constructed wetlands, and the
factors affecting algal antibiotic degradation comprehensively described and assessed. In addition, the
use of algae as a precursor for the production of biochar is highlighted, along with the modification of
biochar with other materials to improve its antibiotic removal capacity and hybrid algae-based treatment
with advanced oxidation processes. Furthermore, recent novel approaches for enhancing antibiotic
removal, such as the use of genetic engineering to enhance the antibiotic degradation capacity of algae
and the integration of algal antibiotic removal with bioelectrochemical systems are discussed. Finally,
some based on the critical review, key future research perspectives are proposed. Overall, this review
systematically presents the current progress in algae-mediated antibiotic removal technologies,
providing some novel insights for improved alleviation of antibiotic pollution in aquatic environments.
Recently, residual pharmaceuticals and personal care products
(PPCPs) have been widely identified in aquatic environments [1].
Antibiotics are a typical category of PPCPs which are increasingly
being detected in the natural environment and associated with
ecotoxic effects [2]. The increased concentration of antibiotics in
the aquatic environment (concentrations of antibiotics rarely
exceed 1 mg L1, but are more commonly in the low ng L1 range)
presents a major hazard due to their toxicity and long-term
persistence [3,4]. In particular, exposure to residues of antibiotics).
half of Chinese Society for Enviro
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (has attracted significant attention because of the increase in anti-
biotic resistance genes (ARGs) and antibiotic resistant bacteria
(ARB) [5]. In 2019, in the US alone, antibiotic-resistant bacteria and
fungus caused more than 2.8 million infections and 35,000 deaths
[6]. Currently, ARB have been extensively detected in most aquatic
environments surrounding point-sources, such as pharmaceutical
companies, hospitals, livestock farms, and wastewater treatment
plants (WWTPs), leading to a high risk of transformation and
migration of ARB and ARGs throughout the aquatic environment
[3]. Furthermore, it has beenwidely demonstrated that WWTPs are
not effective at removing ARBs, ARGs, or antibiotics from contam-
inated wastewater. It has been reported that in the absence of
policy interventions, the global consumption of antibiotics in 2030
could increase by 200% relative to their use in 2015 [7]. Accordingly,
reducing the release and dispersion of antibiotics throughout then
Currently, various technologies have been applied for the
removal of antibiotics in the aquatic environment, including bio-
logical, physical and chemical methods [8]. Advanced treatment
technologies such as adsorption, chlorination, activated carbon
filtration, membrane processes, advanced oxidation processes
(AOPs), photocatalysis, and the use of nanomaterials and ferrate
treatment have been introduced [9e11]. For example, Du et al. [9]
reviewed that metaleorganic frameworks (MOFs) have excellent
photodegradation and adsorption efficiency for antibiotics. Li et al.
[12] reported that tetracycline removal efficiency was more than
95% via Fe-based MOF. However, these methods have some notable
limitations, for example, the antibiotic removal efficiency of
adsorption is extremely adsorbent-dependent, with adsorbents
usually being at a high cost [13], while AOPs and photocatalysis are
typically efficient but require costly chemical reagents or catalysts
[14], while potentially generating secondary pollutants [15], such as
large quantities of metal sludge.
Compared to physical and chemical methods, biological treat-
ments provide some unique benefits, such as being
environmentally-friendly and having low economic costs [16].
Algae are primary produced in aquatic ecosystems. They can be
used as ecological indicators and remove contaminants, due to
their short growth cycle, high sensitivity to aquatic pollutants, and
initiate stress response mechanisms [17]. Algae-based remediation
techniques were first conducted in the 1950's to remove nutrients
and dissolved carbon from sewage. The main advantage of algae-
based technologies is that they do not need additional energy to
effectively remove pollutants [18,19], unlike the conventional ap-
proaches, such as micro-filtration and sludge activation, which
require significant energy inputs [20]. Recently, algae-based tech-
niques have been wildly utilized for the treatment of wastewater
containing antibiotics, providing numerous benefits including
efficient fixation of CO2, low-environmental impact, solar energy
driven activity, and providing a potential raw material for the
generation of biofuel or other high-value by-products [21,22]. For
example, triclosan can be completely removed from water by
Nannochloris after 7 days of cultivation [23] and diphenhydramine,
memantine and trihexyphenidyl can be efficiently degraded by
algae, with average degradation rates of 88%, 59% and 83%,
respectively [24]. Microalgae-mediated technology could removal
groundwater pollution by organic microcontaminants such as
pesticides and antibiotics (up to 65%) [25].
Antibiotic degradation and removal methods have been
reviewed elsewhere, for example, Peiris et al. [26] and Yan et al. [27]
summarized the potential utilization of biochar and bio-
electrochemical system to degrade antibiotics. However, in-
vestigations into the performance and mechanisms of algae-
mediated antibiotic wastewater treatment have not been compre-
hensively reviewed. This review aims to supplement the emerging
literature on algae-based technologies and identify the key chal-
lenges and knowledge gaps. Firstly, microalgal removal mecha-
nisms (bioadsorption, bioaccumulation, and biodegradation) as
well as the factors affecting antibiotic degradation by algae are
introduced. After which the use of algae as a biotemplate for the
production of photocatalysts is discussed. Furthermore, the use of
materials to improve algal photosynthetic activity is reviewed and
the recent novel approaches for enhancing antibiotic removal are
summarized and compared, including the potential use of genetic
engineering to improve antibiotic degradation and the use of
microalgal-bacterial consortia for antibiotic treatment. In addition,
microalgal antibiotic degradation can be integrated with other
advanced techniques, such as AOPs, ultraviolet (UV) irradiation,
integration with other microbial species, hybrid algae-based
treatment-constructed wetland systems, and bioelectrochemical2
systems. Finally, the main research challenges and future prospects
are discussed.
2. Perspective #1: biological treatment for antibiotic based
on algae
2.1. Algal removal mechanisms: bioadsorption, bioaccumulation,
and biodegradation
When exposed to antibiotics, algae initiate stress response
mechanisms that degrade toxic antibiotics and assist algal survival
[15]. Table 1 summarizes the removal efficiency of different anti-
biotics by algae-based techniques and the involved mechanisms.
Currently, bioadsorption, biodegradation, bioaccumulation, photo-
degradation, volatilization, and hydrolysis are the main pathways
of antibiotic removal that have been identified in algae [28]. As
reported by Hena et al. [29], the specific physicochemical proper-
ties of PPCPs are the major factor affecting which mechanism algae
use to degrade antibiotics in wastewater. Theoretically, algae
remove organic contaminants primarily by absorption, due to the
physio-chemical characteristics of organic contaminants [30]. Ac-
cording to Nguyen et al. [31] and Xiong et al. [21], photo-
degradation, volatilization and hydrolysis pathways not being
universal and only occur under particular conditions, generally
providing a minor contribution to removal. Therefore, this review
mainly focuses on bioadsorption, bioaccumulation and biodegra-
dation (Fig. 1).
Bioadsorption is a physico-chemical procedure in which anti-
biotics are directly removed from wastewater using the adsorptive
capacity of biological materials [31]. Biomaterials are structurally
complex and diverse due to the wide range of components present
in biomass and the variation in functional groups, such as phos-
phate, thiol, carboxyl, hydroxyl, and amino groups, which are
affected by physico-chemical processes to varying degrees [32].
Bioadsorption by algal cells occurs when antibiotics are either
adsorbed to components of their cell wall, or onto organic sub-
stances (e.g., extracellular polymetric substances (EPS)) that are
discharged by algal cells into the surrounding aquatic environment
[33]. EPS are a combination of various biopolymers formed by
microorganisms which may consist of up to 90% organic matter,
such as protein, polysaccharides, enzymes, lipids, and substituents.
EPS have various structural and functional roles, such as the
enhancement of cell adsorption capacity, surface characteristics,
enzyme retention, mass transfer stability, structural stability, and
digestive functions [34,35]. Interactions between negatively
charged microalgal cell walls or secretions (both collectively
termed the cell surface) and antibiotics, occurs via a passive and
non-metabolic process [21]. For example, metronidazole (initial
concentration was 5 mM) can be removed by Chlorella vulgaris via
bioadsorption and the removal efficiency can reach 100% [36].
Furthermore, the biomass of nonliving microalgae has also been
demonstrated as a promising biosorbent material for the removal
of antibiotics. For instance, the residual biomass of the lipid-
extracted Chlorella sp. has been shown to have a high capability
for cephalexin adsorption and removal [37]. Furthermore, after
lipid extraction, Daneshvar et al. [38] assessed tetracycline removal
from wastewater using microalgal biomass, showing that the
maximum adsorption capabilities of Tetraselmis suecica and Sce-
nedesmus quadricaudawere 56.25 and 295.34 mg g1, respectively.
Bioaccumulation is an active metabolic process for antibiotic up-
take, noting that it is a key function of livemicrobial cells, relying on
different chemical, physical, and biological mechanisms that
include both intra- and extracellular processes. In bioaccumulation,
passive diffusion is a poorly defined process with a limited
contribution to antibiotic removal, while energy-dependent uptake
Table 1
Algae reported as biological techniques for the removal of different antibiotics and the mechanisms involved.
Antibiotic Algae Mechanisms Removal Ref.
Tetracycline Chlamydomonas sp. Tai-03 Biodegradation, photolysis, and hydrolysis 100% [43]
Tetracycline Spyrogira sp. Photodegradation 89% [47]
Tetracycline a Biosorption 295.34 mg g1 [38]
Tetracycline b Biosorption 56.25 mg g1 [38]
Sulfamethoxazole Chlamydomonas sp. Tai-03 Biodegradation ~20% [43]
Sulfadiazine Chlamydomonas sp. Tai-03 Biodegradation, biosorption, photolysis, and hydrolysis 54.53% [28]
Sulfathiazole Spyrogira sp. Biodegradation and indirect photodegradation 36% [47]
Ciprofloxacin Chlamydomonas sp. Tai-03 Biodegradation, biosorption, photolysis, and hydrolysis 100% [28]
Ciprofloxacin Scenedesmus dimorphus Bioadsorption and biotransformation 93% [48]
Erythromycin Scenedesmus obliquus Biodegradation, hydrolysis, and photolysis 97%c [45]
Norfloxacin Chlorella vulgaris Photodegradation 36.9% [49]
Levofloxacin Chlorella vulgaris Biodegradation and bioaccumulation 82.35% [44]
Azithromycin Chlorella vulgaris Biodegradation 92.77% [44]
Azithromycin Haematococcus pluvialis Biodegradation 78% [44]
Amoxicillin Microcystis aeruginosa Biodegradation 30.5e33.6% [50]
Amoxicillin Microcystis aeruginosa Biodegradation 18.5e30.5% [51]
Spiramycin Microcystis aeruginosa Biodegradation 12.5e32.9% [50]
Cefradine Chlorella pyrenoidosa Biodegradation 41.47 ± 0.62% [52]
Cephalexin d Biosorption 63.29 mg g1 [37]
Ceftazidime Chlorella pyrenoidosa Bioadsorption and biodegradation 93% [21]
Ceftazidime Chlorella pyrenoidosa Bioadsorption and biodegradation 92.70% [46]
7-amino cephalosporanic acid Chlorella pyrenoidosa Bioadsorption and biodegradation 96.07% [46]
7-amino cephalosporanic acid e Bioadsorption, hydrolysis and photolysis. 100% [53]
a Dry biomass of lipid-extracted Scenedesmus quadricauda
b Dry biomass of lipid-extracted Tetraselmis suecica
c Calculated based on the literature.
d Dry biomass of lipid-extracted Chlorella sp.
e Chlorella sp. Cha-01, Chlamydomonas sp. Tai-03, Mychonastes sp. YL-02.
Fig. 1. Mechanisms involved in the removal of antibiotics by algae. Reprinted with permission from Xiong et al. [21], copyright (2021) Elsevier.
S. Li, P.L. Show, H.H. Ngo et al. Environmental Science and Ecotechnology 9 (2022) 100145is an active transport step driven by energy [32]. For example,
bioaccumulation has been observed during the removal of
trimethoprim, sulfamethoxazole, florfenicol [39], and carbamaze-
pine [40], in which antibiotics enter algal cells through passive
diffusion.
Biodegradation includes the transformation of complicated
compounds into simpler small-molecules through catalytic meta-
bolic degradation [41]. According to Tiwari et al. [42], microalgal
biodegradation can occur via two major mechanisms: firstly, by3
metabolic degradation where antibiotics provide a carbon source
and serve as electron donors or acceptors for microalgae; and
secondly, by co-metabolism where the antibiotics are reduced by
enzymes, causing the formation of non-toxic product compounds.
Biodegradation has been demonstrated to be the most efficient
mechanism for the removal of antibiotics by algae-mediated tech-
nologies [43]. For example, Kiki et al. [44] investigated the degra-
dation potential of different algae including C. vulgaris, Selenastrum
capricornutum, Haematococcus pluvialis, and S. Quadricauda for ten
S. Li, P.L. Show, H.H. Ngo et al. Environmental Science and Ecotechnology 9 (2022) 100145antibiotics, finding that biodegradation was the main mechanism
for antibiotics removal, while bioaccumulation, bioadsorption and
abiotic factors accounted for relatively smaller contributions.
Similarly, Wang et al. [45] inoculated S. obliquus into wastewater to
determine the erythromycin degradation pathways. Results
showed that after 5 days of cultivation, biodegradation (including
bioadsorption), hydrolysis and photolysis were the main mecha-
nisms of erythromycin degradation in the microalgae-mediated
system, with biodegradation (including bioadsorption) respon-
sible for the highest proportion of removal (57.87%), followed by
hydrolysis (<34.13%) and photolysis (<5%). It has previously been
reported that ciprofloxacin can be completely removed by Chla-
mydomonas sp. Tai-03, with biodegradation accounting for up to
65.05% of removal [28]. In summary, the degradation of antibiotic
by algae-based technologies, can be divided into 3 distinct pro-
cesses: 1) fast adsorption due to physicochemical interactions be-
tween the antibiotics and algal cell walls, 2) the relatively slow
transference of molecules through algal cell walls, and 3) biodeg-
radation, bioaccumulation, or both [46].
2.2. Using algae-bacteria consortia for antibiotic treatment
As discussed, algae have the capacity to directly remove anti-
biotics using extracellular enzymes or heterotrophicmetabolism. In
addition, the biodegradation capabilities of algae may also be
improved indirectly by symbiotic communication with bacteria
[54], photosynthetically altering pH conditions, or due to large
amounts of oxygen formation [55]. As depicted in Fig. 2a, algae-
bacteria consortium techniques can degrade antibiotics in waste-
water via mechanisms such as biodegradation, volatilization,
photodegradation, and sorption. In algae-bacteria consortia, both
bacteria and algae can serve as biosorbents, with EPS formed by
bacteria and algae also supply crucial sites for the biosorption of
antibiotics [56]. Ismail et al. [57] found that combining Chlorella sp.
and isolated bacterial strains achieved highly efficient ketoprofen
biodegradation and tolerance. Guo et al. [21] developed a novel
algae-activated sludge mixed system for the degradation of ceph-
alosporins, which achieved a higher total removal efficiency of
97.91% with green algae shown to have an outstanding cefradine
removal rate.Fig. 2. (a) Processes included in the removal of PPCPs using algae-based techniques,
modified from Ref. [56]. (b) Sorption and photodegradation based tetracycline removal
during wastewater treatment using algal ponds [60].
4
High rate algal ponds (HRAPs) have been applied as bioreactors
for wastewater treatment since the 1950's [58], effectively utilizing
mixed algae-bacteria cultures to achieve energy efficient antibiotic
degradation [59]. For example, >93% removal of 100 mg L1 tetra-
cycline from wastewater was achieved mainly via indirect photo-
degradation, when the HRAP was conducted at a hydraulic
retention time (HRT) of 4 days [60] (Fig. 2b). Moreover, de Godos
et al. [61] reported effective tetracycline removal in lab-scale
HRAPs, demonstrating that sorption and photodegradation were
the major removal mechanisms. However, few studies have
investigated the fate of antibiotics in HRAP treatment systems. In
summary, the results presented above suggest that the feasibility of
using algae-bacteria consortia to treat antibiotic containing
wastewater is promising in terms of the effectiveness and opera-
tional costs, providing a safe and sustainable approach for antibiotic
wastewater treatment.
2.3. Integration of algae with other microorganisms (fungi and
multiple algal species)
Apart from the aforementioned bacteria, fungi are another
important type of microbe that is able to facilitate antibiotic
removal by algae. Using fungi to treat high-strengthwastewater has
shown promising results, providing numerous benefits compared
with bacteria in biological wastewater purification. According to
Sankaran et al. [62], fungal wastewater remediation not only
transforms organic matter into high-value fungal proteins and
useful biochemicals (such as amylase, chitin and lactic acids), but it
also forms large dewaterable fungal biomass, which can be utilized
as an animal feed source and may even be consumed in human
diets. Additionally, fungi have high resistance to inhibitory sub-
stances and an abundance of extracellular enzymes that promote
the bioremediation of recalcitrant compounds. According to Silva
et al. [63], pollutant biodegradation by fungi includes either an
extracellular enzymatic system (i.e., manganese peroxidase, ver-
satile peroxidase, laccase, and lignin peroxidase) or an intracellular
enzymatic system (mainly the cytochrome P450 system). Some
filamentous fungi can pelletize, further involving microalgal cells.
Contaminant removal mechanisms of algae-fungi consortia are
shown in Fig. 3. Algae-fungi consortia have been shown to be
capable of treating antibiotic wastewater. For instance, biopellets
composed of C. vulgaris and Aspergillus niger have exhibited sig-
nificant removal capability for ranitidine [64]. Furthermore, fungi-
assisted harvesting of algae has been found to enhance the removal
range pharmaceuticals from wastewater [65]. In addition to the
potentially high removal rate, biopellets allow harvesting by sedi-
mentation or sieve filtration, leading to significantly reduced
treatment costs. Co-pelletization through the addition of fungi and
algae does not need extra chemical or energy inputs and may be a
promising treatment solution.
Algae are non-target microorganisms for antibiotics and there-
fore, the disturbance of algae by antibiotics is limited, with no
resistant species or resistant genes known to be formed during the
procedure of antibiotic treatment [66]. Thus, a combination of
multiple algae has been found to be beneficial to the removal of
antibiotics. In this regard, the cefradine removal efficiency of
C. pyrenoidosa cultured in filtered M. aeruginosa culture fluid was
75.48 ± 0.29%, which was significantly higher than using
C. pyrenoidosa alone [52]. These findings suggest that the combi-
nation of multiple algal strains is a promising strategy for the
treatment of antibiotics in wastewater.
2.4. Hybrid algae-based treatment and constructed wetlands
Constructed wetlands (CWs) have the advantages of being
Fig. 3. Contaminant removal mechanisms using the algae-fungi consortia. (a) Algae
and fungi work together to degrade wastewater: I. Capture or adsorption of suspended
solids; II. Reduction by extracellular enzymes secreted by fungi; III. Assimilation of
soluble nutrients by algae and fungi. (b) Detailed description of the assimilation of
soluble nutrients via microalgae and fungi. Note: Glu indicates glucose; CBB cycle
indicates the Calvin-Benson-Bassham cycle. Modified from Ref. [67].
Fig. 4. Factors affecting antibiotic degradation by algae.
S. Li, P.L. Show, H.H. Ngo et al. Environmental Science and Ecotechnology 9 (2022) 100145sustainable, with easy, low-cost and energy-efficient operation,
while also having high efficiency for antibiotics removal due to
substrate absorption, biodegradation and plant uptake [68]. Huang
et al. [69] reported that more than 84% of oxytetracycline and
difloxacin could be removed by vertical flow CWs. CWs can be
easily influenced by many factors, such as CW type, plant species,
HRT, hydraulic loading rate, pH, substrate type, temperature, and
dissolved oxygen content, resulting in a complex range of differ-
ences in the mechanisms and removal rates of antibiotics [70].
Algae associated with CW systems have been considered as an
outstanding substitute for wastewater treatment and have been
developed to a reasonably mature level [71]. For instance, HRAPs
were combined with CWs to treat wastewater, with algal biomass
enhanced in the HRAP, while the concentration of dissolved oxygen
was improved by photosynthesis, resulting in hybrid system
removal capacity being significantly higher than CW-only systems
[72]. Similarly, Silveira et al. [73] used an integrated system with
algae and CWs to degrade wastewater, with results suggesting that
the combined system had excellent chemical oxygen demand
(COD) and 5-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD5) reductions as
well as removal efficiency of nearly 98% for NeNH3. Rabello et al.
[74] provided a review of the relationship between the presence of
the most broadly explored PPCPs in wastewater and the configu-
ration of CWs and algae tanks designed to reduce them, proposing
that integration of CW systems and algae tanks could be a prom-
ising method for PPCPs removal from domestic wastewater.
2.5. Factors affecting antibiotic degradation by algae
2.5.1. Effects of algal culture conditions and antibiotic concentrations
Antibiotic degradation by algae is influenced by many factors,
such as the pH, temperature, level of CO2 enrichment, light in-
tensity, HRT and antibiotic concentrations (Fig. 4). The solution pH
is a key factor affecting the interactions between the adsorbent and5
adsorbate [75], not only influencing the charge of algal cell surfaces
but also the degree of speciation and ionization of antibiotics. It has
previously been reported by de Godos et al. [61] that a cultivation
pH ranging from 7.5 to 8, supports tetracycline zwitterion forma-
tion, which facilitates adsorption onto the algal surfaces. Temper-
ature affects the metabolic processes of algal cells and enzyme
activity with the optimum temperature for microalgae demon-
strated to be 25e30 C [76]. Temperature extremes could disturb
kinetic rates and although higher temperatures generally improve
kinetics, they can negatively affect other aspects such as enzyme
function and cell activity. For example, Rico et al. [77] found that the
PSII and growth rates for S. obliquuswere similar at 30 C and 20 C,
but the growth rate based on the determined concentration of
chlorophyll-a was found to be lower at 30 C than at 20 C. In
addition, many studies have reported that CO2 concentrations in
the range of 6e15% support the accumulation of S. obliquus,
Chlorella sp., N. oculata, and Spirulina sp [78,79]. Furthermore, the
accessibility and availability of light is an important factor due to
the reliance of microalgae on light energy. Light wavelength, in-
tensity, and duration (light/dark cycle) are crucial factors that
should be considered to ensure efficient degradation of antibiotics
by algae. Furthermore, in order to optimize the operational pa-
rameters of photobioreactors for maximum antibiotic removal ef-
ficiency by algae, the HRT is a crucial element that requires careful
control. Generally, the HRT utilized for wastewater treatment in
photobioreactors varies in the range of 2e10 days. Shorter HRT
conditions improve nutrient loading and could enhance algae
growth, while longer HRT conditions could increase the nutrient
removal performance [80].2.5.2. Effects of algae species and antibiotic structures
The removal of antibiotics using algae as biological methods has
been achieved with varying removal efficiencies (%) depending on
the species of algae and the structure of antibiotics (e.g., the hy-
drophobicity of the antibiotic and the functional groups accessible
for adsorption) [44]. All algal species are not universally able to
remove all types of antibiotics from wastewater and therefore, the
choice of species is a crucial step. As reported by Sutherland and
Ralph [81], algae from the genera Scenedesmus, Chlorella, and
Chlamydomonas are the species most thoroughly investigated and
Fig. 5. (a) N-doped graphite biochar generated from C-phycocyanin extracted from
Spirulina residues for catalytic persulfate activation, organic oxidation and nonradical
disinfection, reprinted with permission from Ref. [82], copyright (2019) Elsevier. (b)
Potassium hydroxide-modified algae-based biochar for sulfamethoxazole removal,
reprinted with permission from Ref. [95], copyright (2021) Elsevier.
S. Li, P.L. Show, H.H. Ngo et al. Environmental Science and Ecotechnology 9 (2022) 100145commonly utilized for antibiotic bioremediation because of their
high potential and widespread availability. Moreover, hydrophilic
substrates are anionic (negatively charged) and have low bio-
adsorption affinities with microalgal cells, due to cells also being
negatively charged. Comparatively, lipophilic cationic compounds
have high bioadsorption affinities with microalgae [81]. For
example, 68% and 100% of the hydrophilic antibiotics sulfameth-
oxazole and trimethoprim remained in algal culture after 14 days of
cultivation, respectively, exhibiting a low level of removal from the
culture [23]. However, the lipophilic antimicrobial triclosan was
obviously removed from the culture with 100% triclosan degrada-
tion observed after 7 days of cultivation [23].
3. Perspective #2: physico-chemical treatment for antibiotic
based on algae
3.1. Modification of algal biochar
Biochar has been considered as a sorbent with high potential for
the elimination of antibiotics from aqueous solution [82]. Recently,
algal biochar, especially macroalgal biochar, has been utilized for
the fabrication and design of various nanocomposite materials for
the bioremediation of antibiotics from wastewater [83]. For
example, mesoporous biochar derived from Chlorella has a large
specific surface area of 126.4 m2 g1, a mean pore diameter of
11.62 nm and an overall pore volume of 0.55 cm3 g1, effectively
separating tetracycline from aqueous solution [84]. In general, the
biochar production processes and its formation parameters (e.g.,
heating rate, stay time, pressure, and final temperature) have a
major impact on the quality, yield and properties (e.g., crystalline,
porous, or amorphous) of biochar (chemical composition, shape,
and size) [85]. The heterogeneous chemical composition can be
effective to determine the surface properties [86]. While, shape and
size of biochar could affect the large specific surface area, which can
make it more easily for antibiotic molecules to spread to the
interact of the biochar and surface [87]. Furthermore, the compo-
sition and proportion of nutrients in algae-derived biochar is
probably affected by many abiotic and biotic elements, such as the
algal species and culture environment (e.g., saline, brackish, or
fresh) [85]. Algal biochar has a smaller carbon component, while it
contains more ash, minerals and nitrogen, compared to biochar
derived from lignocellulosic biomass [88]. Interestingly, algae rich
in a large abundance of proteins and can be directly converted into
natural nitrogen-doped biochar in situwithout the requirement for
any additional modification [89]. According to Wan et al. [90], a
high content of nitrogen could facilitate the production of p-p
bonds and further reinforce the ion adsorption of antibiotics,
improving the antibiotic removal efficiency. In general, algal bio-
char seems to be a promising procedure for antibiotic removal due
to the renewable nature of feedstock, high contents of nitrogen,
high thermal stability, and highly porous structure [91]. How to use
algal biochar more efficiently remains a challenge.
Improving pyrolysis temperatures increase the hydrophobicity,
aromaticity, and specific surface area of biochar [91]. Choi et al. [92]
evaluated the formation of Spirulina sp.ederived biochar at various
pyrolysis temperatures for tetracycline removal, with results
showing that biochar achieved maximum tetracycline adsorption
efficiency (132.8 mg tetracycline per g biochar) due to p-p and
hydrophobic interactions, metal complexation and functional
groups bindings when the pyrolysis temperature was 750 C. It has
also been reported that the ID/IG (intensity ratio of D band and G
band) values of biochar decreased from 0.91 to 0.79 with an in-
crease in pyrolysis temperature from 400 to 900 C, indicating that
effective thermal pyrolysis conditions could lead to the formation
of an abundance of well-ordered graphitic carbons [82]. The6
biochar obtained at 900 C served various roles in organic accu-
mulation and peroxydisulfate activation, as well as the electron
shuttle process from sulfamethoxazole to peroxydisulfate (Fig. 5a).
However, the antibiotics present in wastewater cannot usually
associate with algal biochar, significantly limiting its functional
applications. To overcome this limitation and acquire the desired
properties, biochar has been combined with trimetallic nano-
particles. For instance, algal biochar reinforced trimetallic nano-
composite (algal biochar@La/Cu/Zr) was successfully fabricated for
wastewater remediation due to its promising adsorption/photo-
catalytic potential [93]. In addition, research has also shown that
acid-mediated biochar exhibits an increased adsorption efficiency
for sulfadiazine due to the increased specific surface area of biochar
[94]. Furthermore, to enhance the sorption efficiency of antibiotics,
the properties and structure of Enteromorpha prolifera biochar were
enhanced by modification with potassium hydroxide under high
temperature conditions, achieving the formation of a highly effec-
tive sorbent for the removal of antibiotics from wastewater [95]
(Fig. 5b).
3.2. The addition of materials to improve the antibiotic removal
capacity of algae
3.2.1. Iron (Fe) salts
Iron is considered to be the most abundant transition metal in
the natural aquatic environment. Iron (III) salts dissolved in liquid
undergoes hydrolysis, forming diverse oligomeric species and
hydroxo substances. Therefore, the photochemical properties of Fe
(III) salts could be used to form hydroxyl radicals in aquatic envi-
ronments. It has been well established that hydroxyl radicals are
one of the most effective oxidizing agents. Algae can release acidic
dissolved organic compounds, such as fulvic acid and humic acid
and matter containing carboxyl structures could react with ferric
ion to enhance the photolysis rate of antibiotics [96]. For example,
S. Li, P.L. Show, H.H. Ngo et al. Environmental Science and Ecotechnology 9 (2022) 100145Ge and Deng [97] reported that the simultaneous photocatalytic
reduction of two fluoroquinolone antibiotics using an Fe (III)-algae
system. However, results showed that the efficiency of photo-
degradation of the two fluoroquinolone antibiotics was better at
lower antibiotic concentrations in the Fe (III)-algae system [97]. In
another study, Zhang et al. [49] also reported that the cooperative
action of algae and Fe (III) could be beneficial to the photo-
degradation of Norfloxacin. The mechanism of photocatalytic
degradation of Norfloxacin shown in Fig. 6a.3.2.2. Nutrients
The addition of suitable nutrients can effectively improve the
removal rate of antibiotics. It has been reported that the addition of
glucose and sodium acetate significantly enhanced the antibiotic
removal capacity of algae [98]. In addition, HCO3
 and CO2 are
inorganic carbon species that are used by microalgae for autotro-
phic growth [99]. Notable improvement was observed in the
cefradine removal efficiency when CO2 was added into the process
[100]. Moreover, Zhang et al. [101] revealed that NaHCO3 did notFig. 6. (a) Photodegradation pathway of norfloxacin in water containing both algae and Fe(II
microalgae and monoclinic BiVO4 under visible-light irradiation, modified from Ref. [106].
7
promote self-decomposition of the target antibiotic, instead
increasing the removal efficiency and total removal capacity of algal
cells. Specifically, results showed that the target antibiotic removal
rate could be improved from 10.21% to 92.89% when NaHCO3 was
added. Furthermore, the addition of sodium acetate as a source of
organic carbon for algae, has been demonstrated to significantly
increase the ciprofloxacin removal rate (56%) as compared to the
system without sodium acetate (13%) [102]. In another study, the
bioremediation of levofloxacin by C. vulgaris increased following
the addition of NaCl, with the improvement in levofloxacin removal
linked to salinity enhanced bioaccumulation and intracellular
biodegradation [103].3.2.3. Photocatalysts
Both algae and photocatalysts depend on the availability of light
resources and therefore, the inclusion of photocatalytic reduction
in antibiotic removal may produce interesting results and deserves
further research [104,105]. Recently, the photosynergistic perfor-
mance of bismuth vanadate (BiVO4) combined with the microalgaeI), modified from Ref. [49]. (b) Mechanism of catalytic degradation of sulfamethazine by
S. Li, P.L. Show, H.H. Ngo et al. Environmental Science and Ecotechnology 9 (2022) 100145Dictyosphaerium sp., was tested under visible-light irradiation for
the first time (Fig. 6b) [106], achieving 83% antibiotic removal ef-
ficiency via the BiVO4-microalgae system, which was higher than
the microalgae only group (41% removal efficiency) [106]. In order
to identify the photocatalytic degradation mechanism, metab-
olomic analysis was performed [106], with results showing that the
tricarboxylic acid cycle was activated and glycometabolic pathways
were improved when BiVO4 was present. Overall, it is feasible that
the addition of specific materials can improve the removal capacity
of algae for antibiotics. However, based on the current research
status, apart from photocatalytic reactions may inhibit the growth
of algae [107], the higher costs will prevent it from being using in a
real-world large-scale application.
3.3. Hybrid algae-based treatment with advanced oxidation
processes (AOPs)
To reduce the bio-recalcitrance of pollutants in wastewater, a
combination of chemical-biological technologies is an emerging
method, allowing the removal of inhibitory organics or strongly
recalcitrant pollutants. AOPs are efficient and powerful techniques
for wastewater treatment [108], such as ozonation, ultrasonication,
photocatalysis, UV radiation, and Fenton/photo-Fenton treatment.
However, AOP technologies are high-cost and require large energy
inputs, especially when complete mineralization of target organic
pollutants is required [3]. In general, AOP technologies consist of
the production of hydroxyl radicals which serve as a powerful
oxidant with these oxidative radicals acting on the targetmolecules
[109]. Recently, AOPs have been increasingly used as a pretreat-
ment process to increase the algal-degradability of antibiotic
wastewater, particularly when the resulting intermediates are
easily removed by subsequent biological treatment processes
(Fig. 7a) [110]. For instance, when the antibiotic concentration was
1000 mg L1, 97.63% of amoxicillin and 91.08% cefradine were
removed, after 12 h of C. pyrenoidosa treatment combined with the
Fenton process (Fig. 7b and c) [111]. Moreover, a reduction in the
amount of Fenton reagents (H2O2 and Fe(II)) has been shown not to
affect the Fenton treatment contribution, while the overall removal
efficiency of the target antibiotic was enhanced [111]. Nevertheless,Fig. 7. (a) Advanced oxidation processes combined with microalgae for the treatment of rec
and (c) cefradine, via a combined Fenton-algal treatment process, modified from Ref. [111]
8
to date, the number of studies assessing combinations of AOPs and
microalgal treatment remain very limited.
In addition, UV light sources can be utilized in combinationwith
bio-treatment [112]. Peng et al. [113] found that algae can improve
the photodegradation of pollutants under UV light exposed con-
ditions, speculating that rapid degradation may occur due to hy-
droxyl radical formation by algae. In order to explore the role of
algae in the degradation of cefradine using a combined UV-algae
method, Du et al. [114] assessed the removal efficiency of individ-
ual C. pyrenoidosa, UV activated, and combined UV-C. pyrenoidosa
treatments, with results showing that reduced effluent toxicity and
a relatively high removal rate (22.01% residue) were acquired after
the UV-algae process, with the algae treatment being vital for the
reduction of effluent toxicity. Subsequently, green algae have been
shown to play an important role in the removal of antibiotics, with
UV irradiation serving as a trigger for algal treatment. This mech-
anism was demonstrated by Yang et al. [115], with an excellent
removal efficiency (99.84%) obtained when UV-irradiation was
applied at 365 nm in combination with S. obliquus [115]. Compar-
atively, Liu et al. [112] established that exposure to UV at shorter
wavelengths was crucial for ceftazidime degradation, with wave-
lengths of 185 nm achieving a removal efficiency of up to 97.26%,
while wavelengths >280 nm had a removal efficiency of up to
97.15% and >365 nm achieved a low removal efficiency of only
8.52% (Fig. 7d). However, although UV irradiation has generally
been combined with biological approaches for wastewater treat-
ment [116], the research on the capability of algae combined with
UV irradiation to remove antibiotics was not sufficient.
4. Perspective #3: novel approaches for enhancing antibiotic
removal
4.1. Potential use of genetic engineering to increase algal
degradation of antibiotics
Genetic engineering can be used to add a desired characteristic
into the target organism. This approach previously used to generate
engineered algae, with the aim of developing algae with specific
functionality and enhanced metabolic activities [21]. For example,alcitrant wastewater, modified from Ref. [110]. The removal efficiency of (b) amoxicillin
. (d) UV/algal treatments, modified from Ref. [112].
S. Li, P.L. Show, H.H. Ngo et al. Environmental Science and Ecotechnology 9 (2022) 100145algal clones have been engineered with functional enzyme genes,
such as for laccase enzymes, which have been demonstrated to
increase the stability of oxidoreductases, ensuring efficient
biodegradation of pollutants [117]. According to Xiong et al. [21],
laccases are extracellular oxidoreductases that are abundant in
plants and bacteria. Novel contamination removal genes from
bacteria have been effectively transferred into mixotrophic algae
for efficient expression, rather than photoautotrophs [117]. For
example, the linA gene of P. paucimobilis UT26 was transferred into
Anabaena sp. PCC7120, resulting in an increase in the lindane
removal efficiency of this cyanobacterium, even in the absence of
nitrate [118].
Microalgal genetic engineering still faces some key challenges,
including 1) the structure and composition of cell walls, 2) selection
agent sensitivity 3) and genomic ploidy [119]. More specifically, the
resilient and complex nature of cell walls presents a main chal-
lenge. Algae cell walls are a complicated heteropolymer incorpo-
rating carbohydrates, lipids, hydrocarbons, carotenoids, tannins,
proteins, and lignin, making them highly resistant to infiltration
[120]. The selection of a suitable agent plays a crucial role in the
effectiveness and efficiency of algal conversion and is dictated by
the species present and the antibiotics native resistance [119].
While, in terms of ploidy, which is the number of homologous sets
of chromosomes in a biological cell and could play an important
role in the efficiency and success of transformation. The main
characteristics of different transformation approaches utilized in
algae genetic engineering studies are summarized in Table 2.
4.2. Integration of algal antibiotic removal with bioelectrochemical
systems
Electricity production from microbes (bioelectricity) has
recently attracted increasing attention as a source of sustainable
energy as a fourth-generation fuel [122]. Bioelectrochemical sys-
tems (BESs) have progressed significantly in the past two decades
[123]. In general, microbial electrolysis cells (MECs) and microbial
fuel cells (MFCs) are the major applications of BESs, and when
coupled with electrochemical redox reactions and microbial me-
tabolisms, provide an excellent option for antibiotics removal [124].
Recently, photosynthetic microbial fuel cells (PMFCs) have been
developed as novel BESs, in which photosynthetic organisms act as
electron donors in the anode chamber or metabolize and grow to
form electron donors in the cathode chamber (Fig. 8a, b, c) [125].
Sharma et al. [125] used C. reinhardtii in the cathode chamber of a
PMFC, with the system achieving a Coulombic efficiency of 9.068%
along with 73.30% COD removal. Aiyer used a co-culture ofTable 2
Main characteristics of different transformation methods utilized in algae genetic engine
Transformation methods Characteristics
Electroporation Easy mode of operation. Commonly utilize
Induced transformation and natural
transformation
Mostly in cyanobacteria and is currently r
Silicon carbon whiskers method Overcomes the cell wall interference to ex
However, strict protection against the haz
Recombinant eukaryotic algal viruses Promising application potential in brown
Trans-conjugation It is mostly in cyanobacteria and is curren
Glass beads The procedures are simple and do not requ
of immature protoplast regeneration tech
Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated
genetic transformation
Performance is reliant on diverse factors,
Microinjection A highly effective and expensive approach
Artificial transposon method Exogenous genes can be directionally inte
Biolistic transformation Exogenous DNA could be imported into n
insufficient genetic background of substan
equipment is required.
9
Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa as anode microbes and
inoculated C. vulgaris in the cathode chamber, resulting in an in-
crease in mean power density by 41.7% (Fig. 8d) [126]. Moreover, a
new algae-bacteria powered biofuel cell was devised for antibiotic
wastewater remediation and energy production, in which algae-
bacteria (C. vulgaris and anaerobic sludge) cooperation was com-
bined with a cathodic bioelectrochemical procedure for high ni-
trogen removal, while simultaneously prompting anodic
bioelectrochemical reduction of the antibiotic florfenicol, with
instantaneous electron absorption from the co-substrate [127]. In
another study, pharmaceutical wastewater was pre-treated in a
photobioreactor utilizing S. abundans, with the effluent further
treated in a PMFC for the generation of electricity and biomass,
resulting in 93.71% of phosphate and 97.12% of nitrate being
removed [128]. Although PMFCs allow sustainable energy forma-
tion from wastewater with high removal rates, system scale-up
remains a major challenge hindering the utilization of PMFCs in
industrial applications. Yang et al. [129] proposed the use of a PMFC
stack, including multiple anodic chambers installed in an algal
raceway pond, as shown in Fig. 8e, achieving a removal of nearly
98% of the ammonium in the aqueous media of the anode chamber.
In summary, these studies suggested that algae-MFC systems
seems to be a novel and sustainable alternative for antibiotic
wastewater treatment [21].
5. Future perspectives and research potential
Considering the benefits of algae-based techniques in terms of
environmental impact, sustainability, and economic viability, they
provide alternative biological methods for the degradation of an-
tibiotics from aquatic environments. However, these technologies
still face some challenges that require further comprehensive
research.
(1) The diversity of physicochemical characteristics of antibiotics
are a major factor for algae, requiring the selection of specific
combinedmechanisms to degrade wastewater contaminants
(Table 1). Moreover, apart from bioadsorption, bio-
accumulation, biodegradation, photodegradation, volatiliza-
tion, and hydrolysis, there may be other mechanisms active
during the removal process and future research should focus
on these aspects.
(2) The potential of algae to degrade antibiotics is high. How-
ever, each algal species can degrade different types of pol-
lutants and thus, the development and design of new algal
species with increased capacity, affinity, and selectivity forering [121].
d for distinct genera but restricted on brown algae.
arely utilized.
ogenous DNA compared to the glass bead method and has low operational costs.
ard of inhalation is required.
algae. However, still requires comprehensive and extensive research.
tly rarely used.
ire expensive transgenic equipment. However, it is limited in macroalgae because
nology.
with this approach being technically challenging.
with delicate and complicated processes.
grated into the receptor genome.
umerous tissues and cells. Diversified vectors could be used to overcome the
ces. The manipulation is mature and controllable, but expensive and specialized
S. Li, P.L. Show, H.H. Ngo et al. Environmental Science and Ecotechnology 9 (2022) 100145the bioremediation of antibiotics is a promising research
focus. Genetic engineering approaches also seem to have
high potential for enhancing antibiotic degradation.
(3) Biochar has been regarded as a promising biosorbent for
organic pollutant removal from aquatic environments [130].
Algae contains an abundance of proteins and can be directly
converted into classic nitrogen-doped biochar in situwithout
any additional modification. However, although algal biochar
has been applied to treat wastewater, the potential for
treatment of antibiotics has not been clearly established to
date.
(4) Due to the low operational cost and high performance of
microalgal systems, they have been utilized to degrade
numerous antibiotics in wastewater. Unfortunately, antibi-
otics can be bioaccumulated in living organisms (e.g., cipro-
floxacin in green algae) leading to the potential feminization
of male fish and decreased reproduction processes [109]. For
this reason, algae need be associated with other treatment
methods when bioadsorption or bioaccumulation is the
primary mechanism of antibiotic removal.
(5) Some fungi can form extracellular enzymes with low speci-
ficity and are highly convenient for the reduction of some
antibiotics, even those exhibiting low water solubility [31].
However, as mentioned above, few studies have investigated
the potential for their association in algae-fungi consortia.
Therefore, further research is required as multiple algal
strain methods have shown promising results for antibiotics
treatment.
(6) Some studies using algae for bioremediation have achieved
successful operation at an industrial scale [131,132].Fig. 8. (a) Algae utilization as a source of carbon in the MFC anode for electricity production.
(c) A dual-chamber photosynthetic microbial fuel cell configuration, modified from Ref. [1
chambers combined an algal raceway pond to form a photosynthetic microbial fuel cell sta
10Nevertheless, most current research has been at the
laboratory-scale, with systems operated using synthetic
media despite the well-known complexity of wastewater
matrices that vary depending on the WWTPs and
geographical regions [63]. Therefore, future work should
focus on real polluted wastewater and industrial scale
cultivation.
(7) Previous research has primarily focused on enhancing
removal efficiency of algae-based technologies for antibi-
otics, while insight on the fate of ARB and ARGs in aqueous
media remains limited [21]. The formation and spread of
ARGs in the environment is increasing worldwide, posing a
major problem that can severely affect environmental and
human health [15]. Thus, the treatment of biomass accu-
mulated downstream is particularly important and this
should be considered carefully in future studies. For example,
the biomass could be reused as functional biochar for anti-
biotic removal.6. Conclusions
This review highlights the application of algae-based technol-
ogies for effective antibiotic removal. For the removal of antibiotics,
bioadsorption, bioaccumulation, biodegradation, photo-
degradation, volatilization, and hydrolysis are the main mecha-
nisms that occur during the removal process by algae-based
technology. Bioadsorption by algal cells takes place when antibi-
otics are either adsorbed to cell wall components, or onto organic
matter that is secreted by the cell. The bioaccumulation capacity of(b) Live algae utilized as an electron donor to the MFC anode for electricity production.
25]. (d) Schematic representation of the microbial fuel cell [126]. (e) Multiple anodic
ck, reprinted with permission from Ref. [129], copyright (2019) Elsevier.
S. Li, P.L. Show, H.H. Ngo et al. Environmental Science and Ecotechnology 9 (2022) 100145living organisms is based on various chemical, physical and bio-
logical mechanisms, containing both intra- and extracellular pro-
cesses, whereas passive uptake plays only a minor and poorly
defined role. Biodegradation includes the conversion of compli-
cated substrates into simpler molecules via catalytic metabolic
reduction. Moreover, the biodegradation capabilities of algae may
be improved indirectly by symbiotic communication with bacteria.
Fungi are another important type of microbe that is able to facilitate
antibiotic removal by algae. In addition, a combination of multiple
algae could be beneficial to the removal of antibiotics. Antibiotic
degradation by algae is influenced by many factors, such as pH,
temperature, CO2 enrichment levels, light intensity, HRT, algal
species, substrate concentration, and the structure of target anti-
biotics. Algal biochar, especially macroalgal biochar, has been uti-
lized for the fabrication and design of various nanocomposites as a
remediation agent for antibiotics removal from the wastewater.
Moreover, the nitrogen content of biochar could enhance the pro-
duction of p-p bonds and strengthen ion adsorption of antibiotics,
improving the efficiency of antibiotics removal. The addition of
other materials (e.g., Fe (III) salts, appropriate nutrients and pho-
tocatalysts) can also improve the photosynthetic activity of algae,
further enhancing the antibiotics degradation effect. AOPs could be
used as a pretreatment process to increase the algal-degradability
of antibiotic wastewater, particularly when the resulting in-
termediates are easily removed by subsequent biological treatment
processes. Furthermore, novel approaches for enhancing antibiotic
removal based on algal treatment are also summarized in this re-
view, including genetic engineering and PMFCs, which are
demonstrated to be potentially valuable technologies for large-
scale antibiotic removal applications.
Declaration of competing interest
No conflict of interest exits in the submission of this manuscript,
andmanuscript is approved by all authors for publication. Thework
has not been published previously, and not under consideration for
publication elsewhere.