Immunology has come a long way, from its early religious beginnings thousands of years ago, to the explosion of 
immunological data in the 21st century. Thanks to discoveries in immunology, our world has seen tremendous 
progress in how we understand and treat disease. However, a lot of unmet clinical needs remain, which require 
focused, real-time collaboration at the clinical and scientific research forefronts. Moreover, the current exponen- 
tial growth in the generation of research data makes it impossible to handle, analyze, visualize, and interpret 
such data without the use of advanced computational tools. We think immunoinformatics- a discipline at the 
intersection of immunology and computer science- will greatly increase efficiency in research productivity and 
disease treatment. 
This perspective paper aims to emphasize the role of immunoinformatics toward pushing the boundaries 
of immunology research. It will also illustrate its clinical applications, including disease prevention, diagnosis, 
prognosis, treatment, monitoring, as well as in drug discovery. 
We believe informatics approaches will be implemented increasingly more frequently in research. Thus, here 
we also discuss a set of fundamental prerequisites to facilitate the efficient and ethical integration of informatics 
in research and ensure immunological advancements provide maximum benefits to society.  
Immunology, as the scientific discipline we know it today, was born
n the beginning of the 19th century with the discoveries of phagocyto-
is by Elie Metchnikoff, and neutralizing antibodies by Emil von Behring
nd Paul Ehrlich [1] . Nevertheless, the roots of immunology can be
raced back to the earliest human civilizations, intertwined with our
nherent need to heal disease. 
Given our primal need to heal disease, it is not surprising that
he ancient medical systems, along with their gods, arose indepen-
ently in various parts of the world [2–4] . In ancient Egypt we see
ekhmet, goddess of healing and medicine [5] ; in India we see the rise
f Ayurvedic medicine [6] . In Mesopotamia we see Ningishzida, god of
he underworld and patron of medicine [4] ; Ixtlilton, god of medicine
n Mesoamerica [7] ; and lastly, god Asclepius, healer of men in Ancient
reece [3] . These deities highlight the importance of medicine in the
ncient world, which was initially practiced using rudimentary tools
forceps, scalpels, bone saws), endemic plants, herbs, and animal parts
uch as brain and snakeskin [4–9] . ∗ Corresponding author at: Mount Sinai Hospital, Joseph & Wolf Lebovic Ctr., 60 M
E-mail address: yprassas@gmail.com (I. Prassas). 
1 These authors contributed equally to this work. 
ttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuno.2021.100007 
eceived 5 August 2021; Received in revised form 2 December 2021; Accepted 9 Dec
667-1190/© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access aurray St [Box32]; Flr 6 - Rm L6-201, Toronto, ON, M5T 3L9, Canada. 
Fast forward a few millennia, advancements in the field of immunol-
gy based on the scientific method have transformed the way we diag-
ose, treat, and prevent disease. The 21st century has seen an exponen-
ial growth in the generation of research data –with immunology being
ne of the fastest growing fields in the biological sciences [10–12] . De-
pite the high pace of scientific output however, we still fall short in our
bility to fully exploit the data generated [13] . Nowadays, we appreci-
te that most diseases are complex and multifactorial, and expectations
rom research are higher and louder than ever before. For example, so-
ial media were inundated with people’s disappointment in the lack of
 vaccine or treatment, even at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
s unrealistic of a demand as this may sound, from a researcher’s point
f view, the reality is that we are expected to achieve more, faster. The
act that a variety of safe and efficacious vaccines against SARS-CoV-
 were distributed around the world only a year after the onset of the
andemic is both one of the proudest achievements of modern science
nd a testament to its potential. However, we don’t have to face another
andemic for research to function at its peak level. While there are treat-
ents for most common conditions nowadays, patients and cliniciansember 2021 
rticle under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ) 
M.K. Chatanaka, A. Ulndreaj, D. Sohaei et al. ImmunoInformatics 5 (2022) 100007 
are no longer satisfied with therapies that have serious side effects. On
he other hand, rare diseases are left largely unaddressed in the scien-
ific and the drug discovery process [14] , which on average has become
ess efficient and more costly [15] . Importantly, we want to prevent the
mergence of disease altogether, based on early risk factors [16] . These
nmet clinical needs require us to establish “peak performance ” prac-
ices routinely. 
We believe that this will be achieved by better integration of infor-
atics in immunology research. 
. Immunoinformatics applications 
Immunoinformatics, or computational immunology, is a field that
onnects computer science and immunology by usage of computational
esources and methods to handle and understand immunology data
17] . Informatics has been incorporated in many immunological top-
cs, from disease prevention and diagnosis to drug discovery ( Fig. 1 ).
urrent uses rely mostly on interpretation of wet-lab immunological re-
ults using computational methods, but many advances in the field have
lready allowed for purely data-driven, in silico discovery to take place
sing publicly available data, as we will highlight below. 
.1. Disease prevention 
One of the key capabilities of immunoinformatics in disease preven-
ion is mapping immune epitopes, which can be used for vaccine design,
llergy prediction, disease understanding and host-pathogen interaction
nalyses [18] . Fig. 1. Applications of immunoinformatics in medicine, drug
2 Advanced prediction algorithms are necessary in reverse and struc-
ural vaccinology, in order to effectively characterize pathogenic epi-
opes and design vaccines faster and more efficiently [19] . With the use
rtemis Comparison Tool (ACT), comparative sequencing of viruses can
lucidate extensive mutations, insertions and deletions. This can help
n designing T-cell epitope-based peptide vaccines, and multi-epitope
RNA vaccines, with the mRNA vaccine for SARS-CoV-2 [20] and Zika
irus [21] , being two recent examples. A most recent example of reverse
accinology using computational methods is the in silico study on the T-
ell and B-cell epitope prediction for the SARS-CoV-2 virus [22] . Here
hey used the screening server RANKPEP, which employs the position-
pecific scoring matrix (PSSM) [23] , the BepiPred and Kolaskar & Ton-
aonkar Antigenicity servers [24] , which use hidden Markov models
nd amino acid propensity scale methods, as well as the server AllerTOP
o compute allergenicity of the predicted vaccine-antigen [25] . 
Adverse effects of vaccines are highly personalized, with pharmaco-
enetic studies having identified polymorphisms in HLA and other genes
hat lead to vaccine-induced immune responses to various diseases [26–
8] . For example, macrophagic myofasciitis (MMF) is an intramuscular
eaction against all vaccines containing aluminum hydroxide [29] , and
mmunoinformatics analyses have been able to correctly classify MMF
atients using F-FDG brain profiles [30] . Moreover, 5–10% of vaccines
o not provide adequate long term antibody levels [31] . Machine learn-
ng (ML) algorithms and tools will allow for personalized vaccination
o develop, and molecular dynamics will permit theoretical epitope ex-
erimentation through atomic motion within a molecular system, rather
han using traditional wet lab methods [32] . 
Additionally, phylogenetic analyses can determine the evolutionary
elationship between viral strains, which can help in epitope prediction. discovery and research. Created with Venngage.com. 
M.K. Chatanaka, A. Ulndreaj, D. Sohaei et al. ImmunoInformatics 5 (2022) 100007 
For example, evidence of horizontal gene transfer of two genes ( ORF8
nd ORF6 ) was found in the HCoV-HKU1 strain of the SARS-Cov-2 virus,
ompared to the first Wuhan-Hu-1 strain, thus delineating the evolution-
ry trajectory of the virus [33] . 
.2. Disease pathogenesis and genetic predisposition 
Understanding host-pathogen interactions can answer questions re-
arding disease pathogenesis. Studies have indicated that Herpes sim-
lex has gene products that are homologous to human proteins such
s ApoE4 and Clusterin, which are implicated in Alzheimer’s disease
AD), hinting at molecular mimicry as an underlying mechanism of
D pathogenesis following H.simplex infection [ 34 , 35 ]. These studies
sed resources such as the BepiPred server [36] in the Immune Epitope
atabase [ 24 , 37 ]. Another team developed an algorithm called Com-
ass, which uses single-cell RNA-seq and flux balance analysis to char-
cterize cellular metabolic states and infer the pathogenic potential of
h-17 cells based on a metabolic switch [38] . 
Comprehending genetic predisposition to disease can direct people
o take preventative measures, and thus reducing risk to developing the
isease. Taking genotype datasets and using support vector machine
SVM) learning or random forest algorithms, disease prediction mod-
ls have been created, linking single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
o complex disease phenotypes such as celiac disease [ 39 , 40 ]. These
ases highlight how informatics has become the foundation of contem-
orary omics studies, without which interpretation of data would not
e possible. 
.3. Biomarkers for diagnosis, prognosis and monitoring 
Biomarkers are invaluable in the clinical setting, and application of
mmunoinformatics on proteomic and immunomic data can accelerate
iomarker discovery. Prognostic serum biomarkers for systemic lupus
rythematosus (SLE) in the form of autoantibodies have been discovered
 41 , 42 ], but initial evaluation tests do not offer pattern information for
iagnosis. Using k nearest neighbor (kNN), an application was devel-
ped in order to accurately identify patients with SLE, thus benefiting
hem from an earlier and accurate diagnosis [43] . In another example,
alon et al . developed a methodology named Immunoscore, which al-
ows quantification of the in situ immune infiltrate in colon cancer, a
rognostic indicator that can be used in future clinical practice [44] .
hen Immunoscore is coupled with Artificial Intelligence (AI) such as
L, digital pathology-based cancer diagnostics can be accelerated, with
ore robust results [45] . Furthermore, a new procedure called FAUST
Full Annotation Using Shape-constrained Trees) was used to detect PD-
 expressing CD8 + T cell populations, making prognosis in a Merkel
ell carcinoma anti-PD-1 trial possible [46] .Moreover, with the aid of
eep learning methods, an automated scoring of HER2 expression that
an direct patients with breast cancer to the right targeted therapy has
een developed, showing that computational approaches can facilitate
linical decision making [47] . 
Digitized whole slide imaging and AI have been used in disease di-
gnosis, monitoring [ 48 , 49 ] and detection, such as invasive ductal car-
inoma [50] . Additionally, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
een used at chest radiography, accurately identifying and classifying
ulmonary tuberculosis [51] . A different representation learning ap-
roach, CellCnn, was used to reconstruct cell type-specific signaling re-
ponses and to identify diseased cell populations with HIV infection,
s well as rare leukemic blast populations [52] . Lastly, imaging has
een applied in predicting clinical outcomes of patients treated with
mmunotherapy [53] . 
Notably, a handful of diagnostic biomarkers have been developed
nd approved for diseases such as SLE and AD. However, most of them
re not used clinically, because we do not understand their role in dis-
ase pathogenesis [ 54 , 55 ]. With ML tools and with precision medicine
rowing traction, it may be possible to salvage many of them [54] . 3 .4. Disease treatment 
Autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (AHSCT) replen-
shes the healthy immune cells pool following depletion of malignant
r autoreactive immune cells [ 56 , 57 ]. Through clinical trials, AHSCT
as demonstrated to effectively induce long-term remission in multi-
le sclerosis [58] , type 1 diabetes [59] , and other autoimmune diseases
 58 , 60 , 61 ]. 
AHSCT, however, is a technology that is prone to failures, with cases
f sepsis and viral reactivations [62] . For example, in rheumatoid arthri-
is, there is a gap between patient treatment with AHSCT and the posi-
ive response [63] . Discovery of robust and reproducible biomarkers, as
ell as adequately collecting, storing and assessing pre- and post AHSCT
atient blood and bone marrow samples, will assist in immune moni-
oring [64] . In other words, biobanking will become crucial, assisting
n AHSCT optimization, by enabling personalized treatment, depending
n patient genetic and environmental background, thereby increasing
HSCT’s utility. To this end, the integration of immunoinformatics in
he analytical process is crucial. 
Lastly, in silico research for epitope prediction in identification of
ancer-specific neoantigens will assist in cancer therapeutics and im-
unotherapy. Efforts to create pipelines for this purpose have already
een successful, with programs such as ProTECT that allow identifica-
ion and ranking of tumor neoepitopes from patient data [65] . Predic-
ion of tumor-associated neoantigens is another strategy for cancer ther-
peutics, with computational pipelines for somatic mutation calling and
LA-allele typing already established [66] . 
.5. Drug discovery 
Bringing a new therapeutic to market takes on average a decade and
osts $2.5B [67] , with cost of failure dominating the expenses [15] . This,
oupled with a significant decline in drug discovery efficiency in the last
0 years [15] , creates grand opportunities for informatics to improve the
rug discovery pipeline. Advancements in computational methods along
ith ever-expanding databases for drug compounds, clinical records,
nd biomedical data [ 68 , 69 ] promise to enhance efficiency of drug dis-
overy and development, and reduce risk of failure. 
AI has been used in various phases of the pipeline, such as drug
esign [70–72] side effects identification in monotherapy or polyphar-
acy [ 73 , 74 ], and even excipient selection [75] . Furthermore, infor-
atics can help identify the most appropriate participants in clinical
rials, which is the costliest and most time-consuming part of the process
 67 , 76 ]. For example, in some cases, exclusion rates of eligible patients
ho have comorbidities and use multiple medications can be as high
s 80% [77] . Thus, matching most appropriate patients with a clinical
rial using informatics will not only accelerate the testing process, but it
ill also enhance its success rate, by favoring an improved risk-benefit
rofile for the tested therapies. Ultimately, these informatics-aided ap-
roaches will lower the cost of drug discovery, while increasing the
peed from inception to market, ensuring that more people have timely
ccess to effective treatments at a potentially lower cost. 
. Future perspective 
We are rapidly moving toward a world where immunology research
s highly efficient, interconnected and democratized. At the center of
his reality is the integration of informatics in every aspect of immunol-
gy. Based on current trends, we anticipate that in the future researchers
round the world will routinely mine open access databases to test their
ypotheses and use sophisticated, user-friendly tools, to design their
ench experiments most effectively. Using informatics tools, the gen-
rated data will quickly turn into useful insights and effortlessly be de-
osited in the public repository for future use. In this paradigm, answer-
ng interesting immunology-related questions will no longer be a priv-
lege of a few well-funded institutions, but a pursuit for anyone with
M.K. Chatanaka, A. Ulndreaj, D. Sohaei et al. ImmunoInformatics 5 (2022) 100007 
Fig. 2. Gearing toward an interconnected future of immunology research using informatics and enabled by five important elements; data-driven science, real time 
collaboration, data governance, data literacy and global infrastructure.
computer and an internet connection [13] . As a result, immunology
ill be a familiar concept to the layperson, who will be open to rou-
inely monitoring their immune system from personal data collected via
earable devices and personalized laboratory tests, which in turn will
reate more data for further research. 
This real-time and democratized pursuit of immunology research
round the globe, will propel biomarker discovery and the development
f personalized vaccines, therapeutics, and disease management modal-
ties at an unprecedented speed, at a much lower cost. 
These are not exaggerated predictions of what immunology could
ecome one day. In some sense, we are already there, as seen by the
mergence of direct-to-consumer products and services that use AI and
ur biological data to improve our health. For example, in China, AI
n health platforms are helping users manage their lifestyle to reduce
hronic disease burden [78] . The company 23andMe estimates genetic
redisposition to various diseases, based on one’s DNA [79] . Similarly,
n American company’s mission “to make chronic illness optional ”, by
ecommending dietary supplements based on one’s microbiome signa-
ure, is telling of the era we are headed toward [80] . To accelerate our
rogress toward this reality, we need to establish the five fundamental
illars below ( Fig. 2 ): 
1. Data-driven science . Currently, research is hypothesis-driven, which
is limited by the deductive thinking of the human mind. Thanks to
the abundance of research data, data-driven research will be pos-
sible, leading to the discovery of biological truths that would oth-
erwise be unnoticed by the human eye. This data-driven approach
better reflects the complexity of health and biological phenomena
and could therefore be more relevant to discovery and clinical prac-
tice [13] . However, it requires a radical shift in the way we con-
duct basic research, from the established paradigm of: hypothesis–
> wet lab experiment–> clinical translation, to: data analysis–> wet
lab experiment–> clinical translation and potentially to: data analy-
sis –> clinical translation [13] . Also, given the fundamental role of
research data in the sustainability of data-driven science, we believe
the mere generation of scientific data will be recognized as a worthy
scientific achievement, thus broadening the definition of academic
productivity and achievement. Indeed, the establishment of dataset
journals, such as Scientific Data (Nature) and Data in Brief (Elsevier) ,
are a testament to these trends. 
2. Real-time interdisciplinary collaboration . Scientific questions will be
tackled simultaneously by several experts, resulting in efficient and
clinically meaningful research output. Immunology researchers who
are interested in understanding disease pathophysiology for exam-
ple, will work in tandem with clinicians, statisticians, data scientists,4 and medical chemists at the same time. Thus, research will be con-
ducted in large networks at improved efficiency and quality. Such
large collaborations have already emerged in the form of interdisci-
plinary international consortia [ 81 , 82 ]. 
3. Data governance . Policies and principles adopted at the international
level will provide a common framework for data labeling, storage,
sharing, and mining, enabling full access and use of biomedical re-
search data. An exciting initiative to this end is that of the Na-
tional Institutes of Health (NIH), which guides and incentivizes re-
searchers to produce datasets following principles that are FAIR (i.e.
Findable, Accessible, Intraoperative, Reusable) [83] . We believe all
countries should provide clear guidelines to standardize and stream-
line the lifecycle of research data and ensure that researchers ad-
here to ethical practices while making the most of the generated
data. 
4. Data literacy . Computational methods will be an integral part of im-
munology research; thus, everyone involved in a research network
will sufficiently understand the fundamentals of data science and be
kept abreast with computational tools and advancements that are
relevant to their line of work. To this end, continuous improvement
of data-relevant skills should be encouraged. 
5. Global infrastructure . A large, networked community of researchers
exchanging data in real-time requires the creation of a global public
infrastructure that enables the storage, curation and mining of data
for a wide range of users [ 13 , 84 ]. To prepare for this reality, research
institutions and governments need to invest in the integration of ad-
vanced computational tools in biomedical research such as cloud
and quantum computing, worldwide access to high-speed internet,
and incentivize researchers to adopt new computational technolo-
gies that improve discovery efficiency. 
. Conclusions 
With the exponential growth in immunology research and the ad-
ances in high-throughput technologies, we are faced with two contra-
ictory challenges: On the one hand, the data deluge challenges our
apacity to handle and capture value from data, thus necessitating the
se of informatics in research. On the other hand, comprehensive, high-
imensional research data still need to be generated to improve existing
omputational tools [85] . Therefore, we believe the future of immunol-
gy is not a world where informatics overtakes bench work, but one
here both disciplines are integrated ( Fig. 2 ). We anticipate that this
erspective will facilitate a growing dialog about the integration of in-
ormatics in immunology research to ultimately accelerate our progress
oward disease prevention and medical care.