Extensive efforts are currently underway to develop safe and cost-
effective electrolytes for large-scale energy storage. In this regard,
water-based electrolytes may be an attractive option, but their nar-
row electrochemical stability window hinders their realization.
Although highly concentrated fluorinated electrolytes have been
shown to be highly effective in suppression of water splitting,
enabling significant widening of the applied potential range, they uti-
lize expensive salts (e.g., lithium bis(trifluoromethane sulfonyl) imide
[LiTFSI] or lithium trifluoromethane sulfonate [LiOTf]); hence, they
cannot be considered for practical applications. Here, we demon-
strate a cost-effective aqueous electrolyte solution combining 14 M
LiCl and 4 M CsCl that allows stable operation of a 2.15-V battery
comprising a TiO2 anode and LiMn2O4 cathode. Addition of CsCl to
the electrolyte plays a double role in system stabilization: the added
chloride anions interact with the free water molecules, whereas the
chaotropic cesium cations adsorb at the electrified interface, prevent-
ing hydrogen formation.
INTRODUCTION
The alarming global warming trends and their negative consequences on the world
economy and population health require a drastic reduction in CO2 emissions. Being
one of the major sources of greenhouses gas pollution, fossil fuel-based electricity
generation technologies have to be replaced with environmentally friendly energy
sources like sun or wind. Despite the significant improvement in the electricity pro-
duction efficiency of these systems during the last decade, their intermittent nature,
resulting in a fluctuating power supply, poses numerous challenges related to their
integration into the existing grids designed to comply with less or non-variable en-
ergy sources. In the search for viable and cost-effective solutions for large-scale en-
ergy storage, effective rechargeable batteries are a natural solution: batteries may
be relatively cheap, and they can be applied anywhere and can be easily designed
and adjusted to customers’ needs. Because of their high capacity, energy density,
and cycle life, lithium (Li)-ion battery systems have become the leading battery tech-
nology. However, conventional Li-ion batteries are based on highly flammable
organic solvents such as dimethyl carbonate and diethyl carbonate. Considering
the massive electrolyte solution quantities required for large-scale energy storage
by non-aqueous rechargeable batteries, these conventional electrolyte solutions
pose severe safety concerns. In this context, water-based electrolyte solutions in
batteries may provide optimal options in terms of safety and cost. For many years,
aqueous electrolytes were considered impractical for rocking chair-type recharge-
able batteries because of the limited potential window of water, which ranges
between 1.23 V (the thermodynamic stability limit) and 1.5 V in dilute electrolyte
solutions.1 For a decade and a half after commercialization of Li-ion batteries
(LIBs) in 1990, research activity regarding development of aqueous batteries re-
mained marginal compared with aprotic Li-ion systems. A substantial breakthrough
toward practical aqueous LIBs was achieved recently by Suo et al.,2 who demon-
strated significant expansion of the electrochemical stability window (ESW) of
aqueous systems to 3.0 V by using a highly concentrated Li bis(trifluoromethane sul-
fonyl) imide (LiTFSI) electrolyte. The improved ESW was attributed to the reduced
electrochemical activity of water in such a concentrated electrolyte and formation
of an effective passivation layer on the negative electrode by TFSI reduction, which
suppresses hydrogen evolution.3 The increased Li+ concentration and electrochem-
ical activity resulted in modulation of the cathodic intercalation potential toward
more positive potential values beyond the hydrogen evolution voltage range.4
This work paved the way for development of other aqueous systems with various
saturated or nearly saturated electrolytes, enabling stable operation of LIBs and
other mono- and multivalent ion batteries.5,6 To date, LiTFSI remains the state-of-
the-art electrolyte solution for aquoeous lithium batteries (ALBs), providing the high-
est potential window among several available water-soluble Li salts. A highly
concentrated (21 M) LiTFSI electrolyte enabled 1.8-V cells based on a Mo6S8 (Cher-
vel phase) anode and LiMn2O4 (LMO) cathode.
Higher voltage—2.1-V average potential—was obtained by mixing LiTFSI with 7 M Li
trifluoromethane sulfonate (LiOTf). This electrolyte, termed ‘‘water in bi-salt,’’ provided
an additional wideningof the ESW intomore negative potentials, enabling stable oper-
ation of a full cell with a TiO2 anode and LMO cathode. Although most of the relevant
LIB cathodes operate within the ESW (0–1.3 V in the Ag/AgCl scale) far below the O2
formation potential, only a few anodes can work stably in aqueous electrolyte solutions
because of H2 evolution, which occurs prior to the redox potential of most typical LIB
anodes. Therefore, increasing the cell voltage requires development of low-voltage an-
odes. In search of realistic options, the working potential of TiO2 (+1.78 V versus Li, cor-
responding to 1.54 V in the Ag/AgCl scale) appears to be located at the maximal
negative vertex of the ESW. Notably, development of aqueous Li4Ti5O12 anodes,
defined by amore negative operation potential of +1.5 V (versus Li) was enabled by us-
ing a combined organic and aqueous electrolyte system, comprising LiTFSI salt in
mixed dimethyl carbonate (DMC):H2O solution.7 Despite the significant progress ob-
tainedby usinghighly concentratedLiTFSI, its practical application for ALBs is doubtful,
mostly because of its extremely high production costs. Using such an expensive salt
cannot be considered a realistic option, particularly for large-scale energy storage
where huge amounts of materials are required.
Here we present a practical implementation of a cost-effective mixed electrolyte
solution containing 14 M LiCl and 4 M CsCl. Apart from the significantly lower
cost, this solution enables assembly of a 2.15-V cell comprising a TiO2 anode
and LMO cathode, which showed better performance in terms of energy density,
efficiency, and cyclability compared with a similar system based on concentrated
LiTFSI. This improved performance is attributed to reduced hydrogen activity
because the presence of Cl ions and formation of an electrical double layer con-
taining hydrophobic Cs+ ions on the anode surface. The stability of the anodes was
improved further by careful optimization of the cell ingredients, including current
collector selection, particle size, and electrode wettability. The proposed electro-
lyte systems open new directions toward formulation of new and cost-effective
Figure 1. The dependence of the ESW on current collector type and electrolyte solution
composition
(A) CVs of TiO2 anodes coated on grafoil collected at a scan rate of 10 mV/s.
(B) ESW of neat titanium and grafoil current collectors tested by CV at 0.5 mV/s in saturated LiCl solution.
aqueous electrolyte solutions for safe and sustainable secondary batteries for
large-scale energy storage.RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The influence of current collector and electrolyte composition on the potential
stability window
The relatively low operating voltage of the TiO2 anode (about 1.55 V versus Li or
1.69 V versus Ag/AgCl in electrolytes containing 1 M Li) entails not only utilization
of a suitable electrolyte solution possessing high water splitting overpotential but
also careful selection of an appropriate current collector with low catalytic activity to-
ward the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Typically, for aqueous battery applica-
tions, titanium,8 stainless steel,9 or aluminum10 foils are adopted as current collectors
because of their good corrosion resistivity and non-catalytic character. However, the
highly corrosive nature of the concentrated chloride solution limits the available op-
tions, and among the metal current collectors, only Ti can be used without severe
corrosion. However, as can be seen in Figure 1A, the cathodic stability of Ti in
concentrated LiCl electrolyte solution is restricted to 1.0 V, where, below this po-
tential, a sharp decrease in the reduction current attributed to H2 formation was
observed. For this reason, it cannot be applied as a current collector for TiO2, which
has a more negative potential window. In search of an electrochemically stable cur-
rent collector, the use of graphite foil (grafoil) was evaluated as an electrochemically
stable current collector in a saturated LiCl solution. As shown in Figure 1A, an
extended negative range up to 1.3 V versus Ag/AgCl was obtained for neat grafoil
film. Encouraged by this stability, the electrochemical performance of TiO2-coated
grafoil films was evaluated in a concentrated LiCl electrolyte solution. Its advantage
over the dilute (1 M) LiCl and 5 M LiTFSI electrolytes can be seen in Figure 1B. The
high Li concentration in the 14 M LiCl solution results in a significant positive shift of
the redox potential by more than 300 mV compared with the 1 M solution and by
about 100 mV compared with 5 M LiTFSI. The high water activity in the dilute LiCl
solution led to pronounced hydrogen formation, expressed by a steep decrease in
the current at the negative vertex. Interestingly, at this low concentration, one can
observe a second oxidation peak spread over a large potential range (1.1 to
–0.4 V), which can be ascribed to de-insertion of protons generated in the low-
voltage regimen.11Cell Reports Physical Science 3, 100688, January 19, 2022 3
Figure 2. The effect of Cs addition as reflected by CV measurements and Raman spectra
(A) ESW window tested by CV measurements at 0.5 mV/s for saturated LiCl and mixed Li-Cs
electrolytes.
(B) Raman spectra collected for various Cs and Li chloride concentrations.
The role of CsCl in system stabilization
Raman OH stretch band spectra collected for 1 M LiCl, 4.5 M CsCl, 14 M LiCl, and
mixed Li-Cs chloride (14 M + 4 M) electrolytes are shown in Figure 2B. Typically,
OH Raman spectra of water or dilute aqueous solutions can be deconvoluted into
five main peaks (Figure S1), where the low-frequency peaks (at approximately
3,074 and 3,233 cm1) are related to symmetric OH vibrations of tetrahedrally
arranged water (i.e., double donor-double acceptor configuration). The bands at
3,430 and 3,565 cm1 are assigned to symmetric OH vibrations arranged in single
and double donor-single acceptor configurations, respectively. The last peak, posi-
tioned at 3,633 cm1, is attributed to the OH stretching mode of bulk-like water mol-
cules.12,13 As can be seen in Figure 2B, a wide OH spectrum containing all of the
vibrational modes was obtained for the 1 M LiCl solution. A pronounced decrease
in the symmetric OH vibration peak, expressed by spectral narrowing toward high
frequencies, was observed for the 4 M CsCl solution because of the increased salt
concentration, which results in rearrangement of the water and formation of asym-
metric H/Cl bonds. Further red-shifting was recognized in saturated LiCl andmixed
LiCl-CsCl solutions; for the latter solution, additional narrowing of the high-fre-
quency regimen related to the bulk-like water vibrational mode was observed. As
described earlier, this behavior is ascribed to the increased Cl concentration, which
results in disruption of the hydrogen bonding network by replacing O-H/O with
O-H/Cl and formation of ionic clusters.14–16 The dissolution of CsCl into the satu-
rated LiCl solution increases the amount of hydrogen chloride bonds in the solution
and further reduces the activity of the water and, hence, the hydrogen evolution.
The obtained Raman spectra suggest that the major factor contributing to the
increased HER overpotential is the addition of Cl ions, which interact with the avail-
able hydrogen in the electrolyte. Nevertheless, it seems that further suppression of
water splitting is provided by the presence of Cs+ in the electrolyte. Adsorption of
cesium cations upon negative polarization results in formation of a Cs+-containing
electrical double layer on the electrode/electrolyte interface, which blocks water ac-
cess to the electrode surface. As found by Huang et al.,17 adsorption of chaotropic
ions (i.e., water structure breakers), and particularly Cs+ ions, which are considered
highly chaotropic cations, on the electrified interface results in expulsion of interfa-
cial water molecules and reduction of the hydrogen bonding network on the elec-
trode surface. As is well established, formation of H2 occurs via multiple reaction4 Cell Reports Physical Science 3, 100688, January 19, 2022
Figure 3. MD simulations of saturated LiCl and mixed LiCl + CsCl solutions
(A and B) Representative systems configurations from MD simulations of (A) 14 M LiCl and (B) 14 M
LiCl + 4 M CsCl. The Li+, Cl, and Cs+ ions are colored in red, blue, and yellow, respectively.
Separation to regions with bulk water and regions with a high density of ions are observed for both
systems, where Cs+ ions are also present in the bulk water regions.
(B–E) Average RDFs, g(r), of the water oxygens around Li+ and Cl ions (C and D, respectively) and
around water oxygens (E).
RDFs for 14 M LiCl systems are plotted in red, and RDFs for 14 M LiCl + 4 M CsCl systems are plotted
in blue.
steps involving electrochemical hydrogen adsorption on the electrode surface
(Volmer step), followed by interaction of the adsorbed hydrogen with solvated pro-
ton (Heyrovský reaction). The presence of Cs+ ions on the surface and the lack of
available protons on the electrode surface increase the energy barrier for the Volmer
and Heyrovský steps, increasing the overpotential for H2 formation. A similar ten-
dency was found by Dubois et al.,18 who demonstrated suppressed HER activity
by addition of chaotropic tetrabutylammonium ions into an aqueous LiCl electrolyte.
Further understanding of the effect of CsCl on the solution structure and the ESW of
the electrolyte was obtained in the present work by classical molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations of 14 M LiCl and 14 M LiCl + 4 M CsCl electrolytes (for more details
regarding the MD simulations and force field parameterization, see the supple-
mental information). The MD simulations we performed reveal regions with bulk-
like water as well as regions with ionic networks in saturated LiCl and saturated
LiCl + 4 M CsCl (see Figures 3A and 3B, respectively). Adding 4 M CsCl reduces
the number of bulk-like water molecules. This effect is shown in Figures 3A and
3B; the LiCl electrolyte system has a greater number of bulk-like water molecules,
in good agreement with the presented Raman spectra. The bulk-like water mole-
cules tend to be arranged in partial tetrahedral networks, forming nanometric water
channels that are kinetically favorable for Li-ion transport.19 Therefore, because
movement of water through these channels is preferable, the amount of water inCell Reports Physical Science 3, 100688, January 19, 2022 5
the vicinity of the electrode surface is expected to increase with the channel dimen-
sions. In contrast, much narrower water channels were observed in simulations when
CsCl ions were added to the solution. As can be seen in Figure 3B, the existing water
channels also contain Cs+ ions, which may diffuse through to the electrode surface
and suppress H adsorption, as discussed earlier.
The average radial distribution functions (RDFs), g(r), of the water oxygens around
Li+ ions, around Cl ions, and around water oxygens for 14 M LiCl (red) and 14 M
LiCl + 4 M CsCl (blue) are presented in Figures 3C–3E, respectively. Inspection of
the RDFs reveals that there are less ordered solvation shells with less distinct peaks
in the solutions with CsCl, which can be ascribed to the chaotropic nature of Cs+
ions. The number of water molecules in the first solvation shell of Li + ions was
reduced from 2.4 to 1.3 with addition of CsCl to the electrolyte solution. The average
coordination number of water around Li+ in the electrolyte solution with CsCl is only
a third of the observed coordination number in diluted LiCl solutions, in which one
Li+ is coordinated with 4 H2O molecules.20 This implies that the Li+ ions are sur-
rounded by several ions, mostly Cl, in their first shell because of the high density
of ions. The number of water molecules is also reduced slightly around Cl ions
from 4.6 to 4.4, whereas the coordination number of water around water does not
change significantly. Considering a molar ratio of 2.01 water per Cl in the LiCl-
CsCl electrolyte solutions versus 2.78 water per Cl in the LiCl solution, one should
expect a pronounced reduction in Cl-O interactions after CsCl addition, similar to
Li-O. Nevertheless, much smaller differences were found in the Cl-O RDF, which
may imply that addition of Cl ions attracts water molecules from the Li+ ion solva-
tion shells toward the Cl anions.Electrochemical performance of the TiO2 anode in mixed LiCl + CsCl
electrolyte solution
Following these conclusions, the electrochemical performance of the TiO2 anode
was evaluated for the saturated LiCl and mixed Li-Cs electrolyte solutions in half-
cell configuration using an over-capacitive activated carbon cloth and Ag/AgCl as
the counter and reference electrode, respectively. As presented in Figure 4, similar
capacity values of 80 and 68 mAh/g were observed at high charging rates of 3 and 5
C (1 C corresponds to 335mAh/g, the theoretical capacity of TiO2). A still better fara-
daic efficiency of 99.4% and 98.8% was obtained in the mixed solution compared
with 97.9% and 98.4%, which was measured in the neat LiCl electrolyte, as shown
in Figures 4A and 4C, respectively. The influence of the mixed solution is relatively
small because the extent of parasitic reactions is expected to decrease at higher
charging rates because of kinetic limitations on H2 formation. More significant differ-
ences were found at lower charging rates; greater charging capacities of 109.7 and
91.6 mAh/g with efficiencies of 97.3% and 99.4% were measured for 1 and 2 C,
respectively (Figures 4A and 4B). As can be seen in Figures 4C and 4D, lower capac-
ity and efficiency values of 99.4 mAh/g (94.2%) and 84.4 mAh/g (96.7%) were
obtained in neat concentrated LiCl solution. Even these relatively low efficiencies
obtained for LiCl salt (and a fortiori the high values of the mixed solution) are still
higher than those obtained for the TiO2 anode in TFSI21,22 of acetate-based23 elec-
trolytes. Moreover, the relatively high conductivity of the LiCl and Li-Cs solution of
31 mS/cm allows application of relatively high charging rates while maintaining
high capacity. This conductivity is significantly higher compared with previous wa-
ter-in-bi-salt electrolytes comprising 21 M LiTFSI + 7 M lithium trifluoromethane sul-
fonate (LiOTf) or 32 M potassium acetate (KOAc) -8 M lithium acetate (LiOAc), which
showed 6.5 and 5.3 mS/cm, respectively.6 Cell Reports Physical Science 3, 100688, January 19, 2022
Figure 4. Electrochemical performance of saturated LiCl and mixed LiCl + CsCl solutions
(A–D) Capacity and corresponding efficiency values and GCD profiles obtained for the TiO2 anode at different C rates for the (A and B) mixed Li-Cs and
(C and D) neat LiCl electrolyte solutions.
After finding an optimized electrolyte solution, the influence of particle size on anode
performance was evaluated further. For this purpose, nanometric (50-nm average
size) and micrometric (3-mm average size) TiO2 particles were chosen, as shown in Fig-
ures 5A and 5B, respectively. As indicated by XRD analyses, presented in Figure S2,
both TiO2 particles show typical spectra related to pure tetragonal anatase phase
(JCPDS card number: 00-004-0477). In general, use of nanosized particles is advanta-
geous for fast kinetics because of their short diffusion length and faster electronic trans-
port. Nanometric particles are also beneficial for high-strain electrodes such as Si orGa.
However, the large surface area obtainedby using nanoscaledparticles facilitates para-
sitic reactions and accelerates undesirable catalytic reactions, such as oxygen or
hydrogen formation. In addition, the low tap density associated with the nanoparticles
resulted in a low volumetric energy density, which may be more important than the
gravimetric energy density in many practical applications.24,25
A comparison of the cyclic voltammograms (CVs) and galvanostatic charge-
discharge (GCD) profiles of the nano- and micro-sized TiO2 anodes is presented in
Figure 6. Similar Li+ insertion/extraction voltages, defined by minimum/maximum
peak current intensity at 1.3 and 0.9 V, respectively (versus Ag/AgCl), were
observed at 10 mV/s for both anodes. However, although a stable response duringCell Reports Physical Science 3, 100688, January 19, 2022 7
Figure 5. SEM images of nano and micro-sized TiO2 particles
(A and B) SEM images of (A) nano-sized (inset shows an enlarged view of the nanoparticles) and (B)
micro-sized TiO2-based electrodes.
the initial cycles was obtained for the micron-sized TiO2 anode, rapid degradation
was detected for the nano-sized TiO2. This trend is well reflected by the GCD mea-
surements conducted at a 1 C rate (based on the theoretical capacity of TiO2 of 335
mAh/g) for both electrodes, as shown in Figures 6C and 6D, respectively. A high-ca-
pacity value of 110 mAh/g and high Coulombic efficiency of more than 97% without
any capacity fading were obtained during the initial 10 cycles with the anode with the
microparticles. In contrast, a lower capacity of 90 mAh/g followed by a quick capac-
ity loss with lower efficiency (94%) was obtained with the anode with the nanopar-
ticles. This system presented significantly higher voltage hysteresis than the micro-
metric anode. Considering the low operation voltage of TiO2, these dramatic
differences can be attributed to the higher surface area of the nanoparticles, which
induces nucleation and growth of nanometer-scale hydrogen bubbles that remain
pinned to the surface of the nanoparticles. Therefore, the connection between the
adjacent nano-sized particles provides a thermodynamically favorable interface for
initial bubble nucleation. Such bubble formation blocks ion conduction pathways
and leads to increased electrode resistance and voltage hysteresis.26 Further optimi-
zation of the anode performance was obtained by improving the wettability of the
electrode surface by application of Ar/O2 plasma treatment. As can be seen in Fig-
ure S3A, poor surface wettability, expressed by the high contact angle of the Li-Cs
solution on the TiO2 surface, was obtained before the plasma treatment, whereas
an excellent wettability was maintained for the plasma-treated sample (Figure S3B).
The effect of the improved surface wettability on the anode performance is pre-
sented in Figures S3A and S3B, which show the CV responses of plasma-treated
and untreated TiO2 electrodes, respectively. A maximal capacity value was obtained
within several cycles for the treated films, whereas a gradual capacity increase was
recorded for the untreated anodes, which presented lower capacity values even
after 100 cycles. Such behavior is attributed to the poor surface wettability, which
prevents effective electrolyte impregnation into the electrode bulk because of the
hydrophobicity of the particles.27 Because the effect of the trapped nanobubbles
and the electrode wettability on the performance is not well described in the litera-
ture, especially for aqueous systems, these findings provide useful information for
further studies in which aqueous electrodes are developed.
Electrochemical characterization of full cells comprising an LMO cathode and
TiO2 anode
Encouraged by the improved performance of the optimized TiO2 anode in themixed
Li-Cl solution, we looked for a suitable cathode that can work stably in the potential
window. There are three practical options for positive electrodes that can be8 Cell Reports Physical Science 3, 100688, January 19, 2022
Figure 6. The influence of particles size on electrochemical performance of the anode
(A–D) CVs of (A) nano-TiO2 and (B) micro-TiO2 electrodes collected in mixed Li-Cs electrolyte at 10 mV/s over initial cycles and (C and D) respective GCD
profiles recorded at a 1 C rate during 10 cycles.
coupled with the TiO2 anode: V2O5, LiFePO4 (LFP), and LMO. CVs of the three cath-
odes (measured at 1 mV/s) are shown in Figure 7. For clarification, the CV response
of TiO2 and the expected full cell voltages are presented as well. The maximal po-
tential window of 2.2 V was maintained for the LMO|TiO2 system. Because of Cl2
formation, only the first redox couple of LMO can be obtained. Application of poten-
tials higher than 1.25 V results in a mixed response involving Li extraction and Cl2
evolution, as indicated by the dashed orange line in Figure 7. Nevertheless, a stable
response can be obtained by limiting the potential range below 1.25 V, as demon-
strated in the following section.
Focusing on the highest voltage system among the options presented above, the
performance of the full cell, comprising a TiO2 anode and LMO cathode, was eval-
uated. The GCD of the full cell is shown in Figure 8. A high capacity value of 97
mAh/g (based on the anode mass) and an average cell potential of 2.15 V were
obtained at a 0.5 C rate. Higher charging rates of 1–5 C resulted in lower capacity
values and higher voltage hysteresis, whereas at 5 C, a capacity of 57 mA/g was
maintained. However, as shown in Figure 8B, high-efficiency values ranging be-
tween 96.8% in 0.5 C to 99.3% in 5 C were measured, indicating only minor to
negligible contribution of the gas evolution reactions (from the negative and pos-
itive potential vertex) on the capacity. Furthermore, an impressive long-term
cyclability was maintained over 1,500 GCD cycles conducted at a 5 C rate (Fig-
ure 8C). More than 87% of the initial capacity was still preserved at the last cycle.
To the best of our knowledge, such a high cycling number has never been re-
ported for an aqueous TiO2|LMO system.Cell Reports Physical Science 3, 100688, January 19, 2022 9
Figure 7. CVs of potential cathodes compatible with the voltage range of the mixed electrolyte
Shown are CVs recorded at a scan rate of 1 mV/s for the TiO2 anode (green) and various cathodes:
LiMn2O4 (LMO; orange), LiFePO4 (LFP; pink), and V2O5 (black). The dashed orange line represents
potential Cl2 evolution with LMO.
Because these measurements were conducted in the T cell configuration, which is
suitable for lab-level applications, a pouch cell comprising LMO|TiO2 in LiCl-CsCl
electrolyte was assembled. As shown in Figure S4A, similar capacity values were
observed from the GCD profiles collected at various C rates. The long-term stability
performance of the pouch cells recorded at 1 C is presented in Figure S4B. After 500
cycles, a high capacity value of 80 mAh/g was still maintained.
The self-discharge performance of the assembled pouch cells is presented in Fig-
ure S5. After 12 h at open-circuit voltage, a capacity retention of 66% was obtained.
Although this behavior is far from being satisfactory for practical applications, further
optimization of the system, including electrolyte systems optimization, cell engi-
neering, and electrode modifications, may dramatically suppress this spontaneous
current leakage.28
A comparison of the performance of the presented system with other reported ALBs
is given in Table S1. Our system provided a performance higher than or comparable
with other ALB systems in terms of capacity and efficiency values and superior long-
term stability.
This work presents a new cost-effective aqueous electrolyte solution comprising 14M
LiCl + 4 M CsCl. This solution provides stable behavior of a TiO2 anode without any
significant parasitic contributions. Because costly LiTFSI-based electrolytes are typi-
cally considered the preferable solution for ALBs, our findings propose an alternative
practical option that shows superior electrochemical performance of a TiO2 anode
and a full TiO2|LMO cell as well. Although a commonly accepted reason for the
improved stability in highly concentrated aqueous electrolytes relates to formation
of anodic passivation films,29 which increases the water splitting overpotential, the
lack of organic SEI-forming species in the Li-Cs electrolyte demand an alternative
explanation for the superior system stability. Based on the presented results it is
possible to ascribe this behavior to three major factors. First, the high Li concentra-
tion in the LiCl electrolyte (more than 2.5 times over the commonly used LiTFSI) shifts
the Li+ insertion potential to more positive values, away from the HER. Second, addi-
tion of Cl ions to the electrolyte results in an increase in the number of Cl/Hbonds,10 Cell Reports Physical Science 3, 100688, January 19, 2022
Figure 8. The electrochemical performance of the TiO2|LMO cell in the mixed Li-Cs electrolyte solution
(A) GCD profiles of TiO2|LMO at different C rates.
(B) Capacity and efficiency values recorded for each charging rate.
(C) Full cell cycling performance recorded over 1,500 cycles.
which further reduces the hydrogen activity. Third, the presence of Cs+ ions in the so-
lution acts as a protective double layer that blocks interactions between the water
and the anode surface. In this context, the use of chaotropic ions/molecules for
HER suppression may be an interesting direction for further development of
advanced aqueous batteries.
A major drawback of our developed electrolyte solution is the high Cl concentration,
which results in a limited positive potential. Nevertheless, several cathodes can be
stably applied as positive electrodes, and a high-voltage TiO2|LMO cell showing
high capacity and impressive cyclability was demonstrated successfully. The work pre-
sented here provides a highly effective strategy that combines development of new
electrolyte solutions and optimization of electrode/electrolyte interfaces. These ap-
proaches can be utilized for further development of cost-effective and sustainable
aqueous batteries.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Resource availability
Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be ful-
filled by the lead contact, Netanel Shpigel (nshpigel@gmail.com).Cell Reports Physical Science 3, 100688, January 19, 2022 11
Materials availability
Nano-sized TiO2 particles, LiCl and CsCl salts, and LFP and V2O5 powders were pur-
chased from Sigma-Aldrich.
Data and code availability
All data generated and analyzed during this study are included in this article and the
supplemental information. The paper does not report any original code.
Electrode preparation
Micro-sized TiO2 powder was synthesized according to the following procedure. The
spherical micro-sized TiO2 particles were synthesized through combination of the
modified sol-gel and solvothermal method.1 In a typical synthesis, 1 mL TiCl4
(Sigma-Aldrich) was added dropwise to a mixed solution containing 35 mL isopropa-
nol and 12 mL acetone (v/v) in a beaker. The mixed solution was stirred at room tem-
perature for an additional 30 min in the beaker. This experiment was carried out in an
argon-filled glove box. After vigorous stirring, the obtained light-yellow transparent
reaction mixture (sol) was further transferred to a 100-mL Teflon-lined still autoclave
and heated at 200C for 12 h. The obtained white precipitate was collected and
washed several times with deionized water followed by ethanol to remove impurities
and dried in a vacuum at 80C for 24 h. Finally, the white powder was calcined in air at
400C for 4 h (2/min ramping), and crystalline spherical TiO2 particles were
obtained.
The electrodes were prepared bymixing the active-material particles with carbon su-
per-p and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) (mass ratio of 80:10:10) in an NMP solution.
The homogenized slurry was coated on grafoil current collectors (0.02-mm thickness)
and dried overnight at 80C.
LMO particles (MTI, USA) were mixed with carbon super-p and PVDF in an NMP
solution to obtain a mass ratio of 80:10:10. The homogenized slurry was coated
on grafoil film and dried overnight at 80C.
Electrochemical measurements
All electrochemical tests were carried out using a SP-300 potentiostat/galvanostat
(Bio-Logic, France). Three electrode cell measurements were conducted in home-
made T cells using excessive carbon cloth and Ag/AgCl as a counter and reference
electrode, respectively.
Full cell assembly was done in T cell configuration and repeated in pouch cell
configuration. Because of the limited positive working potential of the cathode,
the electrodes were balanced at a mass ratio of 1:2.5 TiO2:LMO.
Physical and morphological characterization
Raman measurements were performed on HOPG electrodes using an integrated
laser and a three-VHG-filter system (ONDAX, XLF-MICRO, 532 nm) with 50 mW of
optical power at an excitation wavelength of lex = 532 nm. The laser output was
routed into a lab-built microscope, and the Raman signal was fiber-coupled into
an imaging spectrometer (Princeton Instruments, SP-2500i) with an electron micro-
scope charge-coupled device (CCD) camera (Princeton Instruments, Pro-EM
1600).2 The acquisition duration was around 100 s per measurement, and a grating
with a groove density of 600 g/mm was used. At least 10 different spots were
measured from each electrode. The baselines of the spectra were shifted for presen-
tation purposes.12 Cell Reports Physical Science 3, 100688, January 19, 2022
HR-scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging was performed using a Magellan
XHR 400L FE scanning electron microscope (FEI) equipped with an EDS detector
(Oxford Instruments).
MD simulations were performed using the CHARMM1,2 and NAMD3,4 programs. Initial
system construction, heating, and equilibration were performed using CHARMM,
whereas NAMD was used for production runs. The initial force field parameters were
based on standard values for Li+ ions,5 Cl ions, and Cs+ ions.6,7 To be able to treat
the highly concentrated water-in-salt solutions, the force field parameters were fine-
tuned by comparison with PBE0 with the aug-cc-pVTZ basis set for all atoms (except
def2-TZVPPD for Cs+)8–13 and use of the NBFIX option in CHARMM.14
Reference energies for ionic interactions
The initial vdWparameters for Cs+, Li+, andCl and for the TIP3P5,15 water model were
taken from theCHARMMtoppar_ion_waterparameter file.6Asdetailedbelow, someof
the ion vdW parameters were modified in this work using the NBFIX strategy.14 Using
this approach, we recalibrated the interactions of ions with their coordinating chemical
groups without affecting the interaction of the ions with other chemical groups. The
changes were made specifically for the systems we examined in this study, and further
work needs to be done to examine transferability to other systems.
The MD simulations of ‘‘water in salt’’ systems were performed with a classical force
field (FF). These systems are highly charged; therefore, we ensured that the lack of
polarizability terms in the FF did not affect the accuracy of the many-body binding
interactions of ion-water clusters. The binding interactions of ionic clusters were
tested against quantum chemistry data calculated at PBE08 with Grimme’s D3 semi-
empirical dispersion corrections10 with basis sets of aug-cc-pVTZ for all atoms
besides Cs+, which used the def2-TZVPPD basis set. Previous works12,13,16 bench-
marked ionic interactions for clusters calculated at PBE0-TS11against the ‘‘gold
standard’’ of LNO-CCSD(T). These studies showed that this DFT method is a valid
reference for ionic interactions and that the energy difference relative to LNO-
CCSD(T) is less than 1 kcal/mol. Comparing the binding energies of Li+ water clusters
with 1–4 water molecules, calculated at PBE0-D3 (this work) with the corresponding
PBE0-TS energies, presents good consistency between the methods, where the
energetic difference is below 1 kcal/mol.
Comparing the binding energies for theQM reference with the classical model
results
In this work, we chose the CHARMM36 FF for calculating the binding energies for
Cs+-water clusters, Cl-water clusters, and Li+-water clusters.
The cluster formation is given by the equation
Ion + nðwaterÞ/IonðwaterÞn
where n is the number of water molecules in the cluster. n values were changed from
one to six for the Cs+ and Cl clusters, whereas the Li+ clusters included one to four
water molecules. The binding energy is defined as
EBinding = EIonðwaterÞn-- EIon-- n  Ewater
The clusters with Cs+ ions and the clusters with Cl ions gave good accuracy
compared with the quantum chemistry reference, with root mean square (RMS)
errors of 1.1 kcal/mol and 2.5 kcal/mol, respectively. On the other hand, the clusters
with Li+ with water yielded a too high error of 15.1 kcal/mol. The pairwise vdWCell Reports Physical Science 3, 100688, January 19, 2022 13
interaction between Li+ and water oxygen was recalibrated using the NBFIX strategy
and reduced the RMS error to 5.7 kcal/mol. We noticed that the error grows with
cluster size, which may be related to many-body interactions.
Because electrostatics are long-range interactions, the binding energies of ion-ion
interaction as a function of the distance between the ions were compared with the
quantum chemistry reference. The repulsive interactions of Cs+-Cs+, Li+-Li+, and
Cl-Cl were checked at distances ranging between 3–15 Å and presented good ac-
curacy compared with the quantum chemistry baseline. The attractive interactions of
Cs+ with Cl and of Li+ with Cl were also computed at distances ranging from
3–15 Å. Here we found that the parameters of the model underbind for the Li+-Cl
interaction and overbind for the Cs+Cl interaction compared with the PBE0-D3
values. Modifying the vdW pairwise interactions between Cs+ with Cl and between
Li+ and Cl using NBFIX reduced the error at the minima from 8.9 kcal/mol to
0.2 kcal/mol for Cs+-Cl and from 25.5 kcal/mol to 3.5 kcal/mol for Li+-Cl.MD simulation protocol
MD simulations of three replicas of 14 M LiCl and three replicas of 14 M LiCl + 4 M
CsCl were performed in the NPT ensemble using NAMD package 17 and the
CHARMM36 FF.14,18,20 The parameters for the ions and water were taken from the
toppar_ion_water parameter file, with some modifications for the pairwise vdW
interactions, as discussed above.
The energy of each model was minimized using ABNR, and the ions were explicitly
solvated in a TIP3P water box with a size of 303 303 30 Å3. The three duplications of
the two system configurations were done for statistical purposes. Specifically, the
three replicas for each system were obtained from extensive Monte Carlo (MC) sim-
ulations that were initiated from random ‘‘water in salt’’ configurations. All setup,
MC, and MD stages of heating and equilibration used the CHARMM program, fol-
lowed by 200 ns of MD simulations using the NAMD package. All models ran under
the same conditions: a constant pressure of 1 atm and a constant temperature of 298
K, which was controlled by a Langevin thermostat.22 The MD simulations ran under
periodic boundary conditions with Ewald summation for the electrostatic interac-
tions24 with a cutoff of 14.0 Å. The short-range van der Waals interactions were
computed within a cutoff of 12.0 Å and switched off smoothly via a switching function
in the range of 10.0–12.0 Å.SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrp.
2021.100688.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
N.S. acknowledges the Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities for financial sup-
port. The research presented in this paper was partially funded by the Israeli Smart
Transportation Research Center (ISTRC).