In-orbit satellite REIMEI, developed by the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, has been relying on off-the- 
shelf Li-ion batteries since its launch in 2005. The performance and durability of Li-ion batteries is impacted 
by various degradation mechanisms, one of which is the growth of the solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI). In this 
article, we analyse the REIMEI battery and parameterize a full-cell model with electrochemical cycling data, 
computer tomography images, and capacity fading experiments using image processing and surrogate optimi-
zation. We integrate a recent model for SEI growth into a full-cell model and simulate the degradation of bat-
teries during cycling. To validate our model, we use experimental and in-flight data of the satellite batteries. Our 
combination of SEI growth model and microstructure-resolved 3D simulation shows, for the first time, experi-
mentally observed inhomogeneities in the SEI thickness throughout the negative electrode for the degraded cells.   
1. Introduction 
Lithium-ion batteries are the technology of choice for various ap-
plications like laptops, smartphones and electric vehicles. Since the early 
2000s they are considered applicable for space missions or more pre-
cisely for low earth orbit (LEO) missions. The requirements for batteries 
in a LEO mission are to be reliable for about 5 years with 30,000 cycles 
when charged for ca. 60 min and discharged for ca. 30 min. [1–4]. 
Battery reliability is hampered by the harsh conditions they have to 
withstand. Already during lift-off they experience severe vibrations. In 
space they suffer from extreme temperatures, radiation, vacuum, and 
microgravity [5,6]. Thus, battery satellites are quite costly (for a small 
scientific satellite: 4 million US dollar [7]). 
Failure of battery satellites may abort the satellite mission and can 
endanger other missions through space debris. Therefore, determination 
and prediction of battery state-of-health during operation is necessary. 
This is only possible by remote control of the satellite system from a 
control station on earth. The antenna receives the telemetry data of the 
battery and transmits operation commands, while the satellite passes the 
ground station during a small time window [7]. 
Typically, the cells are tested extensively prior to the mission start. 
Cycling experiments are conducted over long periods of time, adjusted 
to the planned mission. Additionally, the cells undergo various abuse 
tests. This ensures safe operability during the whole mission. 
If the mission changes for unforeseen reasons, the predictions for the 
aging of the cells have to be adjusted. A long time might have passed, 
however, since the start of the mission. Access to cells of the same kind 
than those used in the mission might be difficult. For these reasons, it is 
essential to have physics-based models available, which can predict the 
performance and degradation of the cells for any given operation of the 
* Corresponding author. Institute of Engineering Thermodynamics, German Aerospace Center (DLR), Pfaffenwaldring 38-40, 70 569 Stuttgart, Germany. 
E-mail address: birger.horstmann@dlr.de (B. Horstmann).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Journal of Power Sources Advances 
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/journal-of-power-sources-advances 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powera.2022.100083 
Received 9 November 2021; Received in revised form 10 January 2022; Accepted 11 January 2022   
Journal of Power Sources Advances 14 (2022) 100083
2
satellite. These models are based on short term experiments. This yields 
the additional benefit of shortening the time for tests prior to the mission 
start. 
The major degradation process taking place in Li-ion batteries is the 
growth of the solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI). This passivation layer 
builds on the anode surface during the first cycles of the cell, when 
solvents from the electrolyte react with Li-ions and electrons. This 
process prevents the electrolyte from further reaction but does not 
passivate the reaction completely. The SEI is growing continuously 
during storage as well as during cycling. Thereby, Li-ions are consumed 
irreversibly, which causes capacity loss of the cell. 
The growth of the SEI is discussed extensively in literature, both in 
experiment and in theory. Usually, either short-term growth, which 
considers growth behavior during the first cycle, or long-term growth, 
which considers continuous growth over months and years, is investi-
gated. In this work, only long-term degradation is discussed. 
In experiments, a square-root-of-time (
̅̅
t
√
) behavior is observed for 
long-term growth [5,8]. Furthermore, experiments show that SEI 
growth is accelerated during cycling compared to storage [8]. Attia et al. 
show that the SEI is especially growing faster during charging of the cell 
[9]. Another aspect is the inhomogeneous growth of the SEI, which is 
investigated on nanoscale [10–12] and on cell level [13]. 
Short-term SEI growth, i.e. the initial build-up of the SEI during the 
first cycles, is addressed by atomistic theories like density functional 
theory and molecular dynamic simulations [14,15]. The long-term 
growth behavior of the SEI can be described with empirical models 
[16,17]. But a better understanding of the internal processes is given by 
physics-based models. For these, several transport mechanisms are 
considered as the rate-limiting process. The most important are electron 
conduction [18,19], electron tunneling [20,21], reaction kinetics [22, 
23], radical diffusion [24,25], and solvent diffusion [26–29]. Single 
et al. compared all of these transport processes to storage experiments 
and show that the most probable mechanism for SEI growth during 
storage is radical diffusion [24]. Das et al. model the asymmetric growth 
behavior which was shown in Ref. [9] by coupling SEI growth to the 
Li-ion concentration in the SEI [19]. Von Kolzenberg et al. extended the 
model of radical diffusion in Ref. [24] by an electron migration effect 
during cycling, which also reproduces the asymmetric growth. They 
describe the transitions between transport- and reaction-limited growth 
and with that give a consistent explanation for the short-term and 
long-term growth behavior [30]. A comprehensive review of SEI models 
is given by Horstmann et al. in Ref. [31]. 
Until recently, electrode level continuum models had not reproduced 
the experimentally observed SEI heterogeneity [26,32]. In his PhD 
thesis, Schmitt implemented a preliminary version of the model of 
Ref. [30] in the software BEST [33] and simulated the growth behavior 
in a 3D resolved microstructure. Thereby, it was shown that the SEI is 
growing inhomogeneously [34]. This was the first time that experi-
mentally observed inhomogeneities in the SEI thickness could be shown 
with a physics-based model. Considering reaction-limited growth, such 
heterogeneous SEI growth has also been recently analyzed by Chou-
chane et al. [23]. 
In this article, we discuss how to incorporate the model of von Kol-
zenberg et al. into the physics-based model for Li-ion batteries of Latz 
et al. [35] and simulate the SEI growth in a pseudo-two-dimensional 
(P2D) framework and in 3D. We are the first to show inhomogeneous 
long-term growth of the SEI in microstructural-resolved simulations. To 
validate our model, we make use of experiments and in-flight data of 
satellite REIMEI’s battery cells. 
REIMEI is a small scientific satellite developed by the Japanese 
Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA). It was launched in 2005 with the 
main scientific mission to observe the aurora and demonstrate advanced 
satellite technology, one of which is Li-ion batteries that use off-the-shelf 
pouch cells. In 2013 the aurora observation was terminated. The satel-
lite operation was extended with the main focus shifted to the prediction 
of performance and lifetime of the on-board Li-ion batteries [6,36]. 
For a profound analysis of the battery state, a physics-based model 
that describes the cell degradation is required. However, only little is 
known about the cells parameters, as a long time has passed since the 
start of the mission. This makes the modeling a challenging task. 
One part of this challenge is the parameterization of the P2D model. 
This is addressed by different optimization approaches, where the error 
between experiment and model simulation, depending on the parame-
ters, is to be minimized. Different approaches can be found in the 
literature. Forman et al. use a genetic algorithm to identify the param-
eters [37]. Rahman et al. use a particle swarm optimization algorithm 
[38]. Here, we extract some parameters from CT images by image pro-
cessing. The remaining parameters are determined with a surrogate 
optimization. To the best of our knowledge, this optimization method 
has not yet been used for battery models. 
In sec. 2, we give a brief overview of REIMEI and its batteries. After 
that, we describe the SEI model in detail in sec. 3, which we then use for 
simulating the cycling and the degradation of the cells. For this purpose, 
in sec. 4, we first determine the parameters of the fresh cell with an 
optimization approach. Subsequently, in sec. 5 we determine the pa-
rameters of the degradation model and discuss the results of the 
degradation and SEI growth simulation. 
2. Experimental data of REIMEI batteries 
Satellite REIMEI, which flies on a polar low Earth orbit (LEO), has an 
orbital period of 96 min. During the sunlight period, the batteries get 
charged via the solar panels, while they discharge during the eclipse 
period to power the loads [5]. This results in 15 cycles a day. To ensure a 
reliable operability of 3–5 years, the temperature of the batteries is 
maintained at 19 − 22◦C [6,7] and the depth of discharge around 20% 
[5]. 
Two identical batteries are connected in parallel on board of the 
satellite REIMEI, each consisting of seven pouch cells connected in se-
ries. The lithium-ion cells are produced by NEC-Tokin Corporation. The 
positive active material is spinel lithium manganese oxide (LMO) and 
the negative electrode consists of graphite. The liquid electrolyte is 1 M 
LiPF6 in EC/DEC (3:7 by wt%) with additives [5,6]. The cells have a 
voltage range of 3.0 V–4.1 V (4.2 V). Their nominal capacity is 3 Ah [8]. 
The in-flight operation of the cells depend on the loads in use. Given 
by the on-board devices, the cells reach their end of life when the end-of- 
discharge voltage (EoDV) falls below 3.75 V [5]. 
For the parameterization of the models, two kinds of terrestrial 
measurements are used. The electric battery response was measured 
after the mission began (see sec. 2.1). We identify parameters of the cell 
microstructure from CT images (see sec. 2.2). 
2.1. Terrestrial electrochemical measurements 
Accompanying the REIMEI mission, Uno et al. performed terrestrial 
cycling experiments [5] with the same kind of cells as those of the sat-
ellite. The experiments span about 27,000 cycles, which is equivalent to 
five years. They charged and discharged several cells with a cycling 
protocol similar to the one of the satellite. To track the degradation of 
the cell, they measured the remaining capacity and the EoDV of the cells. 
In the experiments, the cells get discharged with a constant current 
(CC) of 1 A for 35 min, which corresponds to approximately 20% DOD. 
Then they get charged for 65 min with a constant current - constant 
voltage (CC-CV) profile. The charging is performed at 1.5 A to the upper 
voltage limit of 4.1 V. After each discharging, the EoDV is measured. As 
the cells are degrading, the EoDV falls below 3.75 V after several 
thousand cycles. At that point, the upper voltage limit for the charging 
gets changed to 4.2 V to prolong the remaining useful life of the cells. 
Before and during the cycling, they measure the remaining capacity of 
the cells several times by discharging it with a CC of 1 A to 3.0 V. We use 
these electrochemical measurements of Uno et al. in sec. 4.1 to 
L.J. Bolay et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of Power Sources Advances 14 (2022) 100083
3
parameterize the P2D model. For the model we assume constant tem-
perature and constant pressure throughout the cell. This assumption is 
based on the experiments in Ref. [5] and on the in-flight data as can be 
seen in Ref. [39]. In sec. 5.1, the measurements are used to parameterize 
the degradation. 
In 2008, Brown et al. conducted comprehensive terrestrial experi-
ments at JAXA. They investigated the degradation of cycled and calen-
daric aged cells under various conditions. For the cycling, they use the 
same cycling protocol than Uno et al. and vary it regarding temperatures 
and discharge currents respectively the depth of discharge (DOD). They 
examined full and half cells before, during and after the aging process. 
Furthermore, they measured open-circuit voltage (OCV) curves for both 
electrodes [8,40]. The OCV curve measurements of Brown et al. are used 
in sec. 4.1 for the P2D model. Furthermore, our cycling protocols in sec. 
5.2 are based on those of Brown et al. 
2.2. Computer tomography 
One of the pouch cells of the kind used in the satellite was stored by 
JAXA. Several years after the start of the mission, CT images of the cell, 
which was stored at room temperature, were taken in various resolu-
tions. Examples of the CT images can be found in Fig. B.1 in the sup-
porting information. From the CT images we extract several parameters 
of the cell structure. These are the thicknesses and porosities of the cell 
layers and the specific surface area of the electrodes. These values are 
necessary to parameterize the model described in sec. 3. 
The thickness L of the layers is determined using the CT images with 
1 μm and 3.5 μm resolution. To separate the layers, we consider gray-
values of voxels in the three dimensional CT image. Every type of layer 
in the cell has a specific grayvalue distribution. We assign the median of 
grayvalues to every voxel layer parallel to the cell layers. Hereby, we get 
a one dimensional signal which is perpendicular to the cell layers. The 
changes of grayvalue medians are determined by signal processing 
methods. These represent the boundaries between cell layers. The 
thickness is then averaged over several layers. 
The porosities ε of the different electrodes are determined from a 
representative section of the 1 μm resolution CT image. The histogram of 
grayvalues within this volume is determined and approximated by three 
normal distributions. For the cathode, the histogram and the corre-
sponding distribution approximation can be seen in Fig. B.2 in the 
supporting information. The integral of these distributions yield the 
volume fractions of the phases in the electrode, the pore space, the active 
solid phase, and the passive solid phase, which consists of binder and 
conductive material. From the distributions, we get a binarization of the 
electrode volume using k-means clustering. We use a simplified version 
of the method described in Ref. [41]. Here, we only want to classify the 
voxels as pore space or solid phase. The classification is assumed suffi-
cient, when the grayvalue distributions classes have the same integral 
than the approximated distributions. The binarization is then used to 
determine the specific surface area Aspec of the electrodes. This is done 
with the software GeoDict [42]. 
In the case of the separator, we proceed in the same way. However, 
here the histogram of the grayvalues is approximated by only two 
normal distributions. The porosity is then again obtained from the in-
tegral of the distributions. 
For the full cell area Acell, the width, length, and number of cell layers 
are needed. The length is taken from the CT image with 140 μm reso-
lution, which shows the whole cell. The width and number of layers are 
taken from the CT image with 24 μm resolution, which shows the upper 
part of the cell. We get Acell = 0.139 m2. The other identified parameters 
can be found in Table B.2 in the supporting information. 
3. Computational model 
In order to understand and simulate the processes taking place in the 
cell, a physics-based model for the short-term cycling as well as the long- 
term degradation behavior of the cells is necessary. The long-term 
degradation of the cell is mainly determined by capacity fading, which 
is caused by the loss of Li-ion inventory. To quantify the long-term ca-
pacity fading under cycling as well as under storage conditions, a new 
physics-based model has been developed. Von Kolzenberg et al. describe 
the model in detail in Ref. [30]. Here, we summarize it and embed it into 
the thermodynamic consistent transport theory for Li-ion batteries of 
Latz et al. [35]. 
This theory models transport and reactions of Li-ions in electrolyte 
and electrode particles on the microstructural scale of batteries. Several 
equations describe how the inner states, like Li-ion concentration or 
electrical potential, are distributed in the cell and how they evolve over 
time. The corresponding equations can be found in the supporting in-
formation [35]. For the microstructure-resolved simulations, first, the 
morphology of the electrodes needs to be reconstructed from tomo-
graphic image data or simulated with given morphology characteristics. 
For example, this is done with stochastic geometry methods by Hein 
et al. [43]. In our research group, this 3D representation of the Li-ion cell 
is then used with the software BEST to perform spatially resolved elec-
trochemical simulations [33,44]. In Ref. [45] Hein et al. use these 
simulations to study and analyse the heterogeneous surface effects (see 
also sec. 5). 
Using volume averaging techniques the transport theory by Latz 
et al. can be uspcaled into a pseudo-multidimensional model [46] like 
the one dimensional P2D model, which is illustrated in Fig. 1. This 
model has first been described by Doyle et al. [47]. It has since been used 
a lot to describe Li-ion battery dynamics [37,38,48]. In Fig. 1a the 
volume-averaged transport of Li-ions in the electrolyte between elec-
trodes is shown. The interfacial reaction kinetics between electrolyte 
and electrode is depicted in Fig. 1b. It is modeled by a Butler-Volmer 
rate, with the overpotential ηs dependent current density jLi+ (ηs) (see 
eqs. A.5 and A.6 in the supporting information). 
When a Li-ion cell gets charged for the first time, the electrolyte gets 
reduced at the anode surface due to the low graphite potential. The 
products build a passivation layer, the solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI), 
which prevents the electrolyte from further reduction. However, the SEI 
continues growing because of a leakage of electrons from the anode 
through the SEI to the electrolyte, where it reacts with Li-ions and sol-
vents. This reaction consumes Li-ions irreversibly, which is one of the 
main reasons for capacity fading. 
The relation between irreversible capacity loss QSEI,irr, SEI thickness 
LSEI, and the growth causing flux NSEI is given as 
∂tQSEI,irr =
AFsSEI
VSEI
⋅∂tLSEI = AF⋅NSEI, (1)  
where NSEI ≥ 0, A is the surface area of the anode, sSEI is the mean 
stoichiometric coefficient of Li in the SEI formation reaction, VSEI is the 
mean partial molar volume of the SEI, and F is the Faraday constant. 
Single et al. provided evidence that electron diffusion through the 
SEI is causing calendaric aging [24]. These electrons diffuse through 
localized state, e.g., neutral Li-interstitials diffusion [49]. The corre-
sponding flux is deduced from Fick’s law and is given as 
NSEI,diff = De− ⋅
ce−
LSEI
, (2)  
where De− is the diffusion coefficient and ce− is the interstitial concen-
tration at the anode-SEI interface, which is dependent on the electro-
chemical potential of the anode relative to Li. This process is depicted as 
process A in Fig. 1c. 
The capacity loss increases when the cell is cycled. Attia et al. show 
that the SEI grows almost exclusively during lithiation of the anode [9]. 
This phenomenon is also modeled by an electron flux, which is influ-
enced by the Li-ion current through the SEI. This can be seen in Fig. 1c 
process B. To take the influence of the Li-ion current into account, an 
electron migration flux is incorporated and the SEI flux is derived from 
L.J. Bolay et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of Power Sources Advances 14 (2022) 100083
4
the Nernst-Planck equation 
NSEI = De− ⋅
ce−
LSEI
− zFκe−
SEI∇Φ, (3)  
with the valence z = − 1, the conductivity of the localized electrons κe−
SEI, 
and the potential gradient ∇Φ in the SEI caused by the Li-ion flux. Ac-
cording to Ref. [24], the electron concentration in the SEI is approxi-
mated by 
ce− = ce−
0 ⋅exp
(
−
F
RT
ηSEI
)
, (4)  
with the interstitial concentration ce−
0 at 0V anode potential, the uni-
versal gas constant R, and the temperature T. Furthermore, the potential 
gradient is approximated by 
∇Φ =
− USEI
LSEI
, (5)  
where the potential drop is defined as 
USEI =
LSEI
κSEI
Li+
⋅jLi+ , (6)  
with the conductivity κSEI
Li+ of Li-ions in the SEI. 
With the help of the Nernst-Einstein equation, the conductivity κe−
SEI is 
approximated by the diffusion coefficient 
De− = RTκe−
SEI
/
ce− ≈ 2RTκe−
SEI
/
ce−
0 (7)  
and eq. (3) is rearranged to 
NSEI =
De− ⋅ce−
0
LSEI
⋅exp
(
−
F
RT
ηSEI
)
⋅
(
1 −
F
2RT
USEI
)
. (8) 
The overpotential for the reaction is given as 
ηSEI = Φs − φe − USEI, (9)  
where Φs is the anode potential and φe is the electrochemical potential of 
the electrolyte. 
The growth of the SEI not only affects the cells capacity but also its 
inner resistance. This is taken into account in the Butler-Volmer rate for 
the intercalation into graphite, where the overpotential is supplemented 
by the potential drop in the SEI and becomes 
η̃s = ηs − USEI. (10)  
The overpotential of the Butler-Volmer term is given in Ref. [35] (see 
also eq. A.6 in the supporting information). 
4. Battery cycling 
We simulate battery cycling with the volume-averaged P2D model. 
Several battery parameters are required for this. The parameters 
describing the microstructure morphologies are extracted from CT data 
(see sec. 2.2). The concentration-dependent electrolyte parameters are 
taken from Ref. [50]. The OCV curves are fitted to the measured curves 
in Ref. [40] (see eq. A.8 and A.9 in the supporting information). The 
remaining cell parameters are determined with an optimization algo-
rithm, where experimental data of a fresh cell from Ref. [5] are used. 
The parameters can be found in Table B.1 and B.2 in the supporting 
information. 
4.1. Parameterization 
The parameters of the cell model, that are not known from literature 
or measurements, are determined by an optimization, where the devi-
ation between experiment and simulation, given as an objective func-
tion, is minimized. 
Those parameters are the initial SOC on the anode side and for both 
electrodes the maximal concentration of Li-ions in the active material cs, 
max, the diffusion coefficient of Li-ions in the active material Ds, and the 
rate constant k. 
The optimization algorithm should find the global minimum and 
preferably it is parallelizable as the evaluation of the time-evolution of 
our physics-based model is time-consuming. To this aim, Forman et al. 
[37] used a genetic algorithm to identify the parameters of the P2D 
model and Rahman et al. [38] used particle swarm optimization. 
Here, we will use the surrogate optimization, which is a stochastic 
optimization algorithm. The benefits of this algorithm are that its 
convergence to the global optimum is proven and that it can run in 
parallel [51]. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that the 
surrogate optimization has been used to identify the parameters of the 
P2D model. 
4.1.1. Surrogate optimization 
We briefly outline the algorithm for surrogate optimization. For 
further details, we refer to Refs. [51,52]. In a first phase, the algorithm 
evaluates the objective function for a given number of points, which are 
randomly chosen in the given parameter space. These points get inter-
polated by radial basis functions to build a surrogate function. In the 
next phase, the point with the smallest value is found. Around this point, 
Fig. 1. Lithium transport on different scales. a) Li-ion transport in electrolyte 
between electrode particles. b) Li-ion current at electrode interface. c) SEI 
growth during calendar aging (A) and during cycling (A + B). 
L.J. Bolay et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of Power Sources Advances 14 (2022) 100083
5
multiple points are sampled and an additional merit function is evalu-
ated at these points. The merit function consists of the surrogate and a 
function that describes the distance of sampled points to already eval-
uated points. This ensures that the surrogate function is minimized while 
searching in new regions. At the point, where the merit function has its 
minimal value, the objective function is evaluated and the surrogate 
function is updated. This procedure is repeated until a stopping criterion 
is reached. Subsequently, the surrogate gets rejected and a new surro-
gate is created with new random points, while the best fit of the previous 
surrogate is kept for comparison. This overall procedure of generating 
new surrogate functions can be repeated until the global optimum is 
found. Usually the search for the optimum is stopped after a predefined 
time. 
4.1.2. Fitting 
The objective function for the optimization is a weighted sum of the 
discharge curve error errV and the EoDV error errEoDV. Here, we chose 
the L1-Norm to measure the discharge curve error: 
errV(θ) =
∫
T
|Vexp(t) − Vsim(t; θ)|dt, (11)  
where Vexp is the experimental voltage and Vsim is the voltage output of 
the simulation over the discharge time T for a given parameter vector θ. 
The EoDV error gets measured after a few cycles, since the cycling range 
has to level off after full discharge in the experiment as well as in the 
simulation. 
The parameters are optimized in a reasonable parameter space. The 
results of the fitting can be found in Table B.2 in the supporting infor-
mation. As the algorithm stopped due to a time stopping criterion, it 
cannot be assumed that the resulting parameters are the optimal pa-
rameters. Also, it has not been shown yet that the parameters of the P2D 
model are identifiable at all. Bizeray et al. showed the identifiability for 
the single particle model, which is a reduced version of the P2D model, 
in Ref. [53]. In Ref. [54], Li et al. analyzed the sensitivity of the P2D 
model parameters. They showed that only part of the parameters is 
identifiable. 
The parameters of the battery cycling and those of the degradation 
are correlated. Thus, the parameterization of both models needs to be 
linked to each other. For that purpose, the degradation parameters are 
taken into account in this section. 
4.2. Simulation and validation with in-flight data 
To validate the determined parameters, the satellite in-flight data are 
used. On orbit, the cells get charged via the solar panels with a CC-CV 
profile. During the eclipse period, they get discharged to power the 
cameras for the aurora observation. There are two different discharge 
profiles, depending on whether the aurora of the north or the south pole 
is observed. The cycling protocols are described in detail in Ref. [8]. 
In Fig. 2 the simulation of the in-flight data is depicted. The data 
were taken from the early life of the battery in 2005. The cycling pro-
tocol, that has been used during this period of satellite operation, was for 
north pole observation. It can also be found in Table 1 (P1). In the figure 
we show the agreement between simulation and experiment over the 
cause of three cycles. It can be seen that the discharge voltage curve is 
met by the simulation. 
5. Battery degradation 
To determine the parameters of the degradation model, long-term 
cycling is simulated with the volume-averaged P2D model (see sec. 
5.1). Subsequently, 3D simulations are performed with the determined 
parameters. Different cycling protocols are used to examine the influ-
ence of charge and discharge currents on the SEI growth in the micro-
structure (see sec. 5.2). 
The degradation with the P2D model is implemented in MATLAB 
[55]. The 3D model is implemented with the software BEST [33]. Both 
kinds of simulations are run on the high performance computer cluster 
JUSTUS 2, which belongs to the bwHPC. 
5.1. Parameterization with P2D model 
We simulate the long-term cycling protocol according to the exper-
iments of Uno et al. [5]. They cycled the cells about 27,000 times. After 
around 24,000 cycles, when the EoDV reaches 3.75 V, the charge voltage 
is changed from 4.1 V to 4.2 V. At 12 different points in time, the cells 
are fully discharged to 3.0 V to measure the remaining capacity. This can 
also be seen in Fig. 3. The charge-discharge protocol used here can be 
found in Table 1 (P2). 
The parameters, that are examined in this subsection, are the initial 
SEI thickness LSEI,0, the diffusion coefficient De− of localized electrons in 
the SEI, and the conductivity κSEI
Li+ of Li-ions in the SEI. The other pa-
rameters, like the mean partial molar volume of the SEI, contribute to 
the model as multiplicative factors and hence are not identifiable. Those 
parameters are taken from literature. All parameters of the degradation 
model are given in Table B.4 in the supporting information. 
The determination of the optimal parameter set is a multi-objective 
optimization problem, where the capacity fading as well as the EoDV 
error have to be minimized. As the simulation of around 27,000 cycles is 
quite expensive in terms of computation time, a sophisticated optimi-
zation algorithm is inappropriate. For that reason, a fixed parameter 
space is used, where the parameters are uniformly distributed in a 
reasonable range. The cycling is then simulated for all combinations of 
parameters simultaneously on the computer cluster. The optimal 
parameter set of the fixed parameter space is chosen. 
In Fig. 3a the capacity fading over around 27,000 cycles is depicted. 
Fig. 3b shows the corresponding EoDV. At around 24,000 cycles, when 
the charge voltage is raised from 4.1 V to 4.2 V, the degradation 
Table 1 
Cycling protocols used in experiments and simulations.  
Protocol Charge (CC-CV) Discharge (CC) Temperature 
P1 1.5 A / 4.1 V 0.88 A 0.74 A 20◦C 
(in-flight) 63 min 15 min 19 min  
P2 1.5 A / 4.1 V (4.2 V) 1.0 A 25◦C 
(P2D) 65 min 35 min  
P3 1.5 A / 4.1 V 1.0 A 25◦C 
(3D) 65 min 35 min  
P4 1.5 A / 4.1 V 2.0 A 25◦C 
(3D) 65 min 35 min  
P5 3.0 A / 4.1 V 2.0 A 25◦C 
(3D) 65 min 35 min   
Fig. 2. Three cycles of satellite REIMEI’s battery. In-flight data and simulation 
corresponding to the satellite cycling protocol. 
L.J. Bolay et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of Power Sources Advances 14 (2022) 100083
6
accelerates. For the simulation, we first consider the red lines. In both 
graphs, we see that the degradation gets overrated at the beginning of 
the cycling. This can be explained by a not optimal choice of cell pa-
rameters. As we already described in sec. 4.1.2, the optimization of the 
parameters is a difficult task due to computation time and the identifi-
ability of the parameters. After around 2,000 cycles, over a wide range of 
the cycling, the trend of the simulation corresponds quite well to that of 
the experiment, especially in the EoDV. At the end, after about 20,000 
cycles, the simulation underrates the degradation of the experiment. At 
this late period of cycling, there are probably additional degradation 
processes taking place in the cell, that are not covered by our SEI growth 
model. This could be for example the cracking of anode particles as 
described in Ref. [56] or Li plating. These processes lead, among other 
things, to a sudden increase of anode surface, which accelerates the SEI 
growth. Mendoza-Hernandez et al. [36] observe indicators for plating in 
the satellite in-flight data. These occur more frequently at a later stage of 
the cycling. Plating is responsible for or accelerates a number of 
degradation processes. This may be another reason why accelerated 
aging is observed that cannot be explained by SEI growth. 
The difference between the new model of von Kolzenberg et al. [30] 
and the model of Single et al. [24] is the additional consideration of the 
Li-ion flux through the SEI during charging. This causes the migration of 
electrons due to an electric potential drop in addition to diffusion. To 
discuss the influence of the electron migration flux for SEI growth, we 
perform simulations of the degradation with and without the term that 
describes the electron migration (zFκe−
SEI∇Φ= 0) in eq. (3). The simula-
tion result is depicted in Fig. 3 as the yellow lines. It can be seen that the 
degradation decreases significantly in that case already after a few 
thousand cycles. Also the trend of the simulation does not correspond to 
the experiments in both graphs. 
5.2. 3D microstructure-resolved simulations 
The microstructure-resolved SEI growth is simulated in 3D with the 
same degradation parameters as determined before with the P2D model. 
The cell and degradation parameters for the 3D simulations can be found 
in Table B.3 and B.4 in the supporting information. There are three 
different cycling protocols used for the 3D simulations. They differ in 
charge and discharge currents to investigate how the current influences 
the SEI growth behavior. The protocols (P3 – P5) can be found in 
Table 1. P3 is equivalent to the cycling protocol used with the P2D 
model (P2). In P4 the discharge current is doubled. This is based on the 
experiments in Ref. [8]. In P5, both the charge current and the discharge 
current are twice as large as in P3. The intervals for charging and dis-
charging are the same in all protocols and correspond to the typical 
satellite battery cycling protocols. 
The 3D simulations reveal an inhomogeneous growth of the SEI. In 
Fig. 4 the results of the simulations with two different cycling protocols 
at three points in time are shown. We see anode particles connected to a 
current collector. The color represents the thickness of the SEI after a 
certain amount of cycles. In the left column the cell is cycled with pro-
tocol P3, the right one is cycled with P4. Fig. 4a and d show the SEI 
thickness after 8 cycles, Fig. 4b and e after 136 cycles, and Fig. 4c and f 
after 672 cycles. 
For all states shown in Fig. 4, there are coexisting regions with a 
thicker SEI and regions with a thinner SEI. In Fig. 4a and d we see that, at 
the beginning of the cycling, the particles near the separator have a 
thicker SEI than those near the current collector. Fig. 4b, c, e, and f show 
that after several cycles, the inhomogeneity spreads over the whole 
anode. When comparing Fig. 4b and e or Fig. 4c and f, we see that this 
happens sooner for the protocol with the higher discharge current. 
After many cycles, there are particular domains of the anode, where 
the SEI is noticeably thicker. In Fig. 4f, we observe that these are the 
thinner parts of the anode. Especially the peak-like structures have the 
thickest SEI. 
The inhomogeneous growth is caused by the varying SOCs through 
the anode and consequently varying overpotentials at the anode SEI 
interface. The thinner parts of the particles reach higher SOCs faster, 
when charging the cell. 
For a quantitative analysis of the growth and variation of SEI 
thickness, its mean, minimum, and maximum, throughout the anode, at 
every computed time step, is depicted in Fig. 5. We investigate here the 
three cycling protocols P3 – P5 at a short period of 25 cycles, which 
corresponds to about two days, and a long period of 400–800 cycles, 
which corresponds to approximately 1–2 months. 
When regarding the SEI thickness at the short period, as shown in 
Fig. 5a, we observe a stepwise growth behavior. During charging of the 
cell or more precisely during lithiation of the anode, the SEI is growing 
faster than during delithiation. These simulations reflect that the growth 
rate depends on the current density, which has been observed experi-
mentally in Ref. [9]. 
Furthermore, when comparing the cycling protocols in Fig. 5a, we 
note differences in SEI thickness and its inhomogeneity. This becomes 
even clearer in the longer period in Fig. 5b. The differences in the total 
length of the cycling simulations are due to numerical instabilities, when 
using higher currents. When comparing the mean SEI thickness of the 
different protocols, we observe that for P3 and P4, which differ in the 
discharge current, there is no significant difference in the thickness. In 
contrast, the SEI is growing faster for P5, which has a higher charge 
current than the other two protocols. This is also in accordance with the 
growth behavior observed in Ref. [9] and rationalized in Ref. [30]. 
The relative maximum deviation, i.e. the difference between mini-
mum and maximum divided by the mean of the thickness, is shown as 
dashed lines in Fig. 5b. The simulations with doubled currents (P4 and 
P5) show a significantly larger deviation, i.e. a more inhomogeneous SEI 
growth. We also see that the deviation is already remarkable for the first 
few cycles and increases only slightly thereafter. 
Fig. 3. Two simulations of degradation experiment with satellite cycling pro-
tocol. Both simulations with equal parameters, one with and the other without 
electron migration flux. a) Capacity and b) end of discharge voltage (EoDV) of 
simulation and experiment. 
L.J. Bolay et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of Power Sources Advances 14 (2022) 100083
7
Fig. 4. SEI thickness of anode particles connected to current collector for two cycling protocols at three time points. Left column (a, b, and c) shows cycling protocol 
P3, right column (d, e and f) shows P4 (cf. Table 1). a) and d) 8 cycles. b) and e) 136 cycles. c) and f) 672 cycles. 
Fig. 5. Variation of SEI thickness in 3D simulation for three different cycling protocols (cf. Table 1). a) Stepwise growth behavior in each cycle. b) SEI thickness and 
relative maximum deviation (dashed lines) over a long cycling period. 
L.J. Bolay et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Journal of Power Sources Advances 14 (2022) 100083
8
6. Conclusion 
In this work, we present models for the short-term cycling and the 
long-term degradation behavior of a Li-ion cell. The modeling is based 
on experimental work and in-flight data of the batteries of small scien-
tific satellite REIMEI, which was developed by JAXA. To describe the 
cycling behavior of the cell, we determine the parameters of the ther-
modynamic consistent transport theory of Latz et al. [35], which we 
incorporate in a P2D model. The parameters are determined with a 
surrogate optimization, in order to fit cycling experiments of the bat-
teries. Subsequently, the model is validated by the satellite in-flight 
data. We could show that the surrogate optimization is appropriate to 
find parameters to fit simulation and experiments of a few cycles. But 
this method has the same limitation as other optimization methods, 
which lies in the unidentifiability of a few parameters of the P2D model. 
One could use the surrogate optimization to fit a wider range of the 
experiment, e.g., the first 1000 cycles. This should improve the accuracy 
of the estimated parameters, and all degradation parameters could also 
be included in the optimization process. However, this would need 
significantly longer computation times. 
Furthermore, we give an overview of a model for the cell degrada-
tion, caused by SEI growth during storage as well as during cycling. This 
model describes the increased growth rate during lithiation of the anode. 
We determine the unknown parameters of the model with the help of 
long-term satellite battery experiments, where we focus on capacity 
fading and end-of-discharge voltage of the cells. 
With the same model and parameters, we simulate cell degradation 
in 3D. The simulations show an inhomogeneous growth of the SEI, 
which depends on the cycling currents. This provides a deeper under-
standing of the processes, which take place in a Li-ion battery. 
Apart from the capacity fading due to SEI growth, there are more 
degradation mechanisms, which have not been considered in this work. 
A degradation mechanism, which can cause severe damages in the cell 
and also contributes to capacity fading, is the deposition of metallic 
lithium on the anode surface. It is referred to as Li plating. In Ref. [36], 
Mendoza et al. analyse the battery in-flight data of satellite REIMEI over 
an interval of 14 years. They observe a knee in the discharge voltage 
curves, which they suggest to be due to plating. Hein et al. modeled Li 
plating and simulated it in a microstructure-resolved framework [45]. 
In this study we chose physics-based continuum models for our 
simulations as these are able to reproduce the processes taking place in 
Li-ion batteries and make them more comprehensible. Apart from that, 
there are a lot more approaches to model the battery behavior. In 
Ref. [57] Shi et al. give a comprehensive overview on multi-scale 
computation methods. Similarly, Wang et al. review multi-scale 
models of SEI formation [14]. To parameterize our continuum models, 
we employ experiments, since atomistic models do not yet provide the 
necessary accuracy. 
In future work, we will incorporate plating into our model. This work 
can be the foundation for performing state estimation and reliably 
predicting the state of health of satellite batteries in orbit. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported by the German Aerospace Center (DLR). 
The authors acknowledge support by the state of Baden-Württemberg 
through bwHPC and the German Research Foundation (DFG) through 
grant no INST 40/575-1 FUGG (JUSTUS 2 cluster). This work contrib-
utes to the research performed at CELEST (Center for Electrochemical 
Energy Storage Ulm-Karlsruhe).