The present work includes the fabrication and electrochemical characterization of cobalt oxide 
(Co 3 O 4 )/graphene nanosheets nanocomposite as efficient electrode for supercapacitor application. The 
characterization techniques involved in this work are scanning electron microscopy and transmission 
electron microscopy for surface morphology, Raman spectroscopy and X-Ray diffraction for structural 
analysis. The specific capacitance of Co 3 O 4 with multilayer graphene nanocomposite was determined to 
be 140 F/g (28 mF/cm 
2 ) at scan rate of 20 mV/s. The composite electrode can deliver a power density of 
856 W/kg with maintaining energy density of 2.38 Wh/kg. The better performance is due to the syner- 
gistic effect of graphene and Co 3 O 4 in the composite. 
The growing demand of energy requires new energy sources 
nd their storage devices. Battery is being considered as a poten- 
ial candidate as it can store large amount of energy. However, the 
hort life, low power density and maintenance cost are the draw- 
acks associated with a battery. In this context, supercapacitor has 
ecome a promising candidate as an energy storage device because 
f its high power density, fast charge- discharge, excellent cyclic 
fficiency and lower maintenance [1–5] . The properties of superca- 
acitor depend on electrode materials, so finding or synthesizing 
lectrode material with advanced properties has become a chal- 
enge to make an advanced supercapacitor to fulfil the present and 
uture requirements [5–10] . Supercapacitor can be categorized in 
wo types based on its energy storage working principles; they are 
lectric double layer capacitor (EDLC) and pseudo-capacitor [ 3 , 4 , 6 ]. 
ifferent types of carbon materials are used in EDLCs, while in 
seudocapacitor the metal oxides are used as electrodes. 
Different metal oxide nanoparticles have been synthesized with 
ramatic characteristics [7–10] . Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article
 http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) ombination of metal oxide and carbon have been fabricated by 
ifferent methods in order to get optimum performance from the 
upercapacitor [7–15] . This is an attempt to make an electrode of 
ultilayer graphene nanosheet nanocomposite with bismuth iron 
xide for supercapacitor application to improve the capacitance 
alue as well as other electrochemical properties [5] . The compos- 
tes have been a preferential choice for any device to improve the 
erformance [16–20] . As graphene has larger surface area and elec- 
rical conductivity, the graphene sheets improve the electrochemi- 
al properties of the composite electrode. L. Tao et al. [4] have used 
obalt oxide (Co 3 O 4 )/graphene nanotube in battery to improve the 
eversible capacity and cyclic stability. There have been many at- 
empts made to enhance electrochemical properties and energy 
fCo 3 O 4 based supercapacitor [11–17] . 
Co 3 O 4 with low cost, non-toxic, easy synthesis and environ- 
ental friendly nature is being considered as promising material 
o be used in supercapacitor application. In this manner, Co 3 O 4 
as been mixed with carbon nanotubes in order to prepare hy- 
rid nanocomposite as electrode with improving the capacitance 
f the electrode [21–22] . It is required to fabricate a supercapacitor 
ith high power and energy density for practical applications. This 
ould be achieved from a nanocomposite consisting of the materi- 
ls which are used in EDL and pseudocapacitors. A composite elec- 
rode was designed by depositing Co O on multiwall carbon nan- 3 4 
under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
In that electrode, 
arbon nanotubes with excellent mechanical flexibility and high 
lectrical conductivity can work as matrices for structural stability 
nd electron transfer. 
Co 3 O 4 has been extensively investigated in order to obtain 
he excellent properties of electrode. Co 3 O 4 nanocomposites have 
een fabricated with graphene [24] , nickel foam [25–26] , carbon 
anotubes [21–22] and ITO films [27] to improve the electro- 
hemical properties of supercapacitor. Nickel foam was utilized 
o prepare freely standing Co 3 O 4 nanowire arrays via template- 
ree growth followed by thermal treatment [26] . A flexible and 
ransparent supercapacitor has been demonstrated using ultrafine 
o 3 O 4 nanocrystals [27] . The fabricated transparent pseudocapaci- 
or exhibited a capacitance of 177 F/g (6.03 mF/cm 
2 ) at a scan rate 
f 1 mV/s, as well as long cycling stability with 100% retention af- 
er 20,0 0 0 cycles. However, there are still some problems associ- 
ted with the Co 3 O 4 based electrode, such as poor electrical con- 
uctivity which decreases the rate capability of adevice [16] . 
Therefore, in the present work an attempt has been made to 
et the advantages of both the EDLC and the pseudocapacitor. 
raphene nanosheets have been mixed to Co 3 O 4 and a hybrid elec- 
rode of Co 3 O 4 /graphene nanosheets has been developed by a sim- 
le solution based approach. Co 3 O 4 has been chosen because of its 
imple preparation, excellent electrochemical behaviour in alkaline 
s well as organic electrolyte. The morphology, structures, and di- 
ension of Co 3 O 4 can be easily controlled by adjusting the pro- 
ess parameters [ 28 , 29 ]. Graphene with 2D structure may provide 
tructural stability and electron transfer [ 5 , 6 ] to Co 3 O 4 and hence
an improve the capacitance of the device. Co 3 O 4 nanoparticles can 
e tightly attached on the surface of graphene nanosheets. 
. Experimental details 
.1. Synthesis of Co 3 O 4 nanoparticles and graphene nanocomposite 
Graphene and Co 3 O 4 nanoparticles were used to make 
anocomposite. The chemicals, cobalt nitrate and ammonium ox- 
late were used to synthesize Co 3 O 4 . Co 3 O 4 nanoparticles were 
repared by solution based approach and the details can be found 
n the literature [30–35] . The composition of these powders were 
:1 mass ratio that is 20% graphene was added to 80% Co 3 O 4 to 
ake the nanocomposite electrode. Fig. 1 shows the systematic 
rocedure to prepare Co 3 O 4 –graphene nanocomposite electrode. 
nitially, Co 3 O 4 nanoparticles were dispersed in DI water (20 ml) 
ith polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) which is used as binder between 
raphene sheets and Co 3 O 4 nanoparticles. The solution was kept 
n a hot plate at 60 °C under magnetic stirring. The graphene 
anosheets were then added to the Co 3 O 4 solution. This prepared 
lurry of Co 3 O 4 and graphene was deposited on two stainless steel 
ubstrates of size 0.5 cm × 0.5 cm each by drop-casting approach 
 Fig. 1 ). The synthesized electrodes were annealed at a 100 °C 
or 1 h. The crystal structure of the nanocomposite electrode was 
tudied by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with CuK α radiations. Scanning 
lectron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy 
TEM) were employed in order to study the surface morphology of 
he electrode. Further, Raman spectroscopy (Horiba, HR 80 0 0, Ar- 
on laser 514.5 nm) was also used to study the present phases in 
he electrode. 
.2. Electrochemical measurements 
The cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic charge–discharge 
GCD) measurements were performed for electrochemical mea- 
urements of the Co 3 O 4 and graphene nanocomposite. All electro- 
hemical measurements were performed in a two-electrode sym- 
etric cell configuration. A tea-bag cloth soaked in 1 M KOH was 2 laced between the electrodes. CV and GCD measurements were 
arried out using a biologic Potentiostat SP-300 instrument. The 
V measurements were performed at different scan rates of 10, 
0, 50, and 100 mV/s. The voltage window was fixed in the po- 
ential range of −0.5 to + 0.5 V. Charging/discharging curves were 
btained in the same voltage window and at different currents. 
lectrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was also employed 
o study the electrochemical properties of the electrode in details. 
. Results and discussion 
XRD pattern of the prepared nanocomposite is illustrated in 
ig. 2 (a). The XRD pattern showed the peaks at position of 
 θ = 19.02 °, 27 °, 31.3 °, 36.87 °, 38.62 °, 44.85 °, 55.73, 59.35 ° and
5.24 °. All peaks, except one at ~27 °, belong to the cubic phase 
tructure of Co 3 O 4 . The obtained spectrum match with the JCPDS 
ard No: 073–1701 file with lattice constant a = 8.08 Å. In addi- 
ion to the peaks of Co 3 O 4 , a different peak at ∼27 ° corresponds 
o the interplanar stacking of the graphene sheets. No other peaks 
re seen in the XRD spectrum. Therefore, XRD confirms the forma- 
ion of nanocomposite consisting of Co 3 O 4 and highly conducting 
raphene nanosheets. 
Further investigation for the structure properties of the 
o 3 O 4 and graphene composite electrode was carried out by Raman 
pectroscopy. Fig. 2 (b) depicts the obtained Raman spectrum of the 
anocomposite electrode, which has all the expected characteris- 
ics, Raman peaks of pure phase Co 3 O 4 and multilayer graphene 
anosheets. The peaks which are between 400 and 700 cm 
−1 are 
ttributed to the crystalline structure of Co 3 O 4 . Among them D 
nd G-bands are also observed which suggests the presence of 
raphene nanosheets in the composite [ 36 , 37 ]. Hence, Raman anal- 
sis also indicates the formation of Co 3 O 4 /graphene nanocompos- 
te based electrode. 
Fig. 3 ( a)-(c) shows the SEM micrographs of prepared sample 
f Co 3 O 4 /graphene nanocomposite. The micrographs are recorded 
t different magnifications and at different places. Here in these 
icrograph images it can be noticed that there are two types of 
icrostructure namely sheets and particles. From the magnified 
EM images, it is visible that the creases and crinkles are formed 
ue to the 2D structure of graphene nanosheets [28] . Graphene 
anosheets with 2D structure are also expected to offer larger 
urface to volume ratio for electrolyte ions [28] . It is also visi- 
le that the graphene sheets and Co 3 O 4 are independently present 
nd formed the nanocomposite. The higher surface to volume ratio 
ould increase the electrochemical properties of the nanocompos- 
te electrode [3] . In Fig. 3 (a) it is visible that the Co 3 O 4 is densely
resent and mechanically attached to the graphene sheet. The role 
f graphene sheet is to improve the electrical conductivity of the 
lectrode and ions mobility over the electrode surface [ 38 , 39 ]. A 
arge numbers of void can also be seen on the electrodes, which is 
eneficially for large power density of a supercapacitor. 
The adhering property of Co 3 O 4 with graphene sheets was con- 
rmed with TEM ( Fig. 3 (d)) . For TEM, the sample was removed 
rom the current collector and placed on a Cu grid. The graphene 
heets and Co 3 O 4 nanoparticles can be seen in the TEM image 
 Fig. 3 (d)) . The nanoparticles are found to be adhered with the 
raphene sheets. No separate graphene sheets or nanoparticles are 
bserved, which indicates that the nanoparticles remain attached 
o the graphene sheets and making good electrical contact for su- 
ercapacitor application. Crystallinity of the Co 3 O 4 particle can be 
onfirmed in HRTEM image ( Fig. 3 (e) ). The lattice fringes belong 
o the plane (220) (0.285 nm) of Co 3 O 4 . 
Electrochemical properties of the synthesized Co 3 O 4 /graphene 
anocomposite electrode were determined in two electrode con- 
guration by CV and GCD. Fig. 4 (a) depicts the CV curve recorded 
n the voltage window of −0.5 to + 0.5 at different scan rates. 
R. Lakra, R. Kumar, P.K. Sahoo et al. Carbon Trends 7 (2022) 100144 
Fig. 1. systematic procedure to prepare cobalt oxide–graphene nanocomposite electrode. 
Fig. 2. (a) XRD spectrum of Co 3 O 4 /graphene nanocomposite electrode and (b) Raman spectrum obtained from the nanocomposite.
This measurement gives the specific capacitance value of particular 
lectrode at different voltage and scan rate. In this method of char- 
cterization, the voltage is changed on the device at a constant rate 
nd the resulted current is recorded. An ideal capacitor exhibited 
 rectangular shaped CV curve [40–42] . In our case, a little distor- 
ion in the CV curve is observed for the Co 3 O 4 /graphene nanocom- 
osite. It is basically due to the pseudocapacitive nature of Co 3 O 4 
40–44] . The redox behaviour seen in the CV curve clears the pres- 
nce of pseudocapacitive behaviour thus confirms the contribution 
f Co 3 O 4 to the overall capacitance. The charge-storage mechanism 
f the Co 3 O 4 /graphene nanocomposite electrode in KOH solution is 
s follows [45] . 
o 3 O 4 + OH 
− + H 2 O ↔ 3CoOOH + e −…………… (1) 
oOOH + OH 
− ↔ CoO 2 + H 2 O + e −……………. (2) 3 The resulted CV has two signatures, electric double layer capac- 
tance from the graphene and pseudocapacitance from the Co 3 O 4 . 
urther, the scan rate was increased in order to check the sta- 
le performance from the composite electrode ( Fig. 4 (a) ). There 
s an increased in CV current with the increase in scan rate. The 
apacitive current is proportional to the scan rate hence high- 
st scanning rate has the highest increase in the current [29–31] . 
he CV curves could retain the quasi-rectangular shape at all scan 
ates, suggesting stable electrochemical performance at high charg- 
ng/discharging rates. But here it is observed that there are little 
egligible bent in the CV curve because of the series resistance of 
he device. 
The capacitance of the electrode was determined using the fol- 
owing equation; 
 = 2I / v . A (3) 
R. Lakra, R. Kumar, P.K. Sahoo et al. Carbon Trends 7 (2022) 100144 
Fig. 3. (a)-(c) SEM, (d) TEM micrographs of Co 3 O 4 / graphene nanocomposite electrode and (e) HRTEM image captured on the surface of a Co 3 O 4 nanoparticle. 
Table 1 
Comparison of specific capacitances of Co 3 O 4 based electrodes reported in literature and this work. 
Electrode Capacitance Ref. 
Ultrafine Co 3 O 4 nanocrystal 177 F/g at 1 mV/s [27] 
Co 3 O 4 thin film 74 F/g at 5 mV/s [52] 
Co 3 O 4 -coated multiwalled carbon nanotube 273 F/g at 0.5 A/g [53] 
Co 3 O 4 nanosphere 128 F/g at 10 mV/s [54] 
Activated carbon and cobalt oxide (Co 3 O 4 ) nanocomposite 94 F/g at 1 A/g [55] 
Co 3 O 4 and graphene nanocomposite 140 F/g at 20 mV/s Present work 
I is the average of charging and 
ischarging current in the CV, v is the scan rate and A is the area
f the electrode. 
The composite electrode showed specific capacitance of 28 
F/cm 
2 determined at scan rate of 20 mV/s. The areal capaci- 
ance is equivalent to 140 F/g, which is comparable to the other 
lectrodes reported in literature [46–56] . The specific capacitance 
btained in the present work is compared with the reported val- 
es for Co 3 O 4 in Table 1 . The capacitance calculated at different 
can rate is depicted in Fig. 4 (b) . The capacitance decreased to 4 .8 mF/cm 
2 at scan rate of 100 mV/s. Further, the charge storage 
apability of the electrode was verified by performing GCD mea- 
urement. A constant current was applied and the voltage was 
onitored. The device was charged and discharged at two cur- 
ents 20 mA and 32 mA (Fig. 4 (c)). The linear change in the volt- 
ge during charging and discharging is typical characteristic of an 
DL capacitor. However, there is observed deviation in the shape 
f charging/discharging curves from a straight line. It could be as- 
ribed to the feature of pseudocapacitance from Co 3 O 4 . Moreover, 
he charging/discharging curves at two different currents are able 
R. Lakra, R. Kumar, P.K. Sahoo et al. Carbon Trends 7 (2022) 100144 
Fig. 4. (a) CV curves recorded at different scan rates and (b) specific capacitance of nanocomposite based supercapacitor as a function of scan rate. (c) GCD curves of the 
supercapacitor recorded with currents of 20 mA and 32 mA. (d) Ragone plot for energy density and power density of the device. (e) cycle stability of the device and (f) 
Nyquist plot. 
Columbic efficiency was also determined to be 97.62%. 
Ragone plot which is the relation between energy and power 
ensity is presented in Fig. 4 (d) for Co O /graphene based super- 3 4 
5 apacitor. The values of the energy and power density were de- 
ermined by charging and discharging the supercapacitor at dif- 
erent rates. Energy density was observed in the range of 2.4 to 
.8 Wh/kg and power density from 0.3 to 0.8 kW/kg. The cycle life 
s an important parameter for any kind of energy storage device. 
Therefore, to determine the stability of the electrode, the device 
has charged and discharged for 10 0 0 cycles. The capacitance re- 
ention for every cycle is plotted in Fig. 4 (e) as a function of cycle
number. The electrode can retain the capacitance about 95% after 
0 0 0 cycles, indicating its suitability for long-term supercapacitor. 
Furthermore, EIS was performed in order to get the idea 
bout change in series and charge transfer resistance after addi- 
ion of graphene to Co 3 O 4 . It can be seen in the Nyquist plots
 Fig. 4 (f) ) that the charge transfer resistance of the electrode is de- 
reasing with graphene sheets. The series resistance of Co 3 O 4 and 
o 3 O 4 /graphene was determined to be 0.64 and 0.17 Ohm, respec- 
ively. As compared with Co 3 O 4 , Co 3 O 4 /graphene nanocomposite 
hows lower series resistance, more vertical line and lower charge 
ransfer resistance thus exhibiting better electrochemical perfor- 
ance [56,57] . 
. Conclusions 
Co 3 O 4 /graphene nanocomposite has been synthesized by so- 
ution based process and tested for supercapacitor application as 
lectrode. The electrochemical properties were evaluated in two 
lectrode system in aqueous electrolyte. The electrode exhibited 
pecific capacitance of 28 mF/cm 
2 at scan rate of 20 mV/s. The 
ymmetric supercapacitor can deliver power density in the range 
f 0.3 - 0.8 kW/kg with energy density of 2.4 to 9.8 Wh/kg. The 
erformance of the device can further be improved by optimizing 
ppropriate concentration of Co 3 O 4 and graphene in the nanocom- 
osite. The fabricated device has shown good electrochemical sta- 
ility with a loss of 5% in capacitance after 10 0 0 cycles. This 
ork suggested that the Co 3 O 4 /graphene nanocomposite may be 
 promising electrode in the application of energy storage devices. 
eclaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
cknowledgments 
We would like to thank Prof. V. S. Raja, Dept. of ME and MS, IIT
ombay, for providing the electrochemical characterization facility. 
ribal affair/UGC New Delhi, Govt. Of India is gratefully acknowl- 
dged for providing financial support to Rajan Lakra.