Technological advances in healthcare have increased the 
use of ionizing radiation in diagnostics and treatment. 
Although the total radiation dose received by the US 
population between 2006 and 2016 decreased by 
15–20%, the number of computed tomographic imaging 
procedures using X-rays has been reported to increase by 
13% (NCRP, 2019). While all processes using ionizing 
radiation cause the patients and the society to receive 
more radiation compared to the past 30 years, it also 
causes an increase in the dose of the healthcare profes-
sionals who carry out the processes (Cornacchia et al., 
2019; Stewart et al., 2012). It is stated that there is a link 
between the increase in the amount of radiation received 
from man-made ionizing radiation sources and the devel-
opment of cancer for life (Guleria et al., 2019; Haylock 
et al., 2018; IAEA, 2018; Schauer & Linton, 2009; Tang & 
Loganovsky, 2018). With this increase, radiation safety has 
become more important compared to previous years in 
order to protect the health and wellbeing of healthcare 
professionals, patients and society. Recent studies have 
attempted to draw attention to the potential risks and 
awareness of doctors about occupational radiation expo-
sure (Wakeford, 2018). However, despite the positive 
health effects of applications, the harmful implications 
of ionizing radiation on human health cannot be 
overlooked (European Society of Radiology, 2011; 
Stewart et al., 2012). Therefore, imaging, interventional 
procedures and therapeutic applications should be con-
ducted in line with certain principles that minimize the 
potential risks for patients, healthcare professionals and 
society.
The general principles of radiation protection are 
justification, improving protection and safety, and 
applying dose limits. In any medical application 
that involves ionizing radiation, obtaining the most 
accurate and reliable result with the lowest possible 
dose is only possible if these main principles are 
followed. This is directly related to the level of 
knowledge about the negative effects of radiation 
on human health among healthcare professionals. 
Sufficient knowledge allows healthcare professionals 
to conduct the risk-benefit analysis of a given pro-
cedure to be performed for their patients, thereby 
protecting themselves and the patients from unne-
cessary radiation.
Studies evaluating the level of knowledge and aware-
ness on radiation safety practices in healthcare profes-
sionals indicate knowledge gaps about the biological 
effects of radiation, even in groups who continuously 
work with radiation (C. I. Lee et al., 2004). Several health-
care professionals exhibit an insufficient level of knowl-
edge concerning the doses utilized in certain radiological
imaging procedures, including those who actually under-
estimate these doses (Faggioni et al., 2017; Yurt et al., 
2014). Furthermore, healthcare professionals who con-
tinuously work with ionizing radiation appear to have 
doubts about which radiological procedures involve 
ionizing radiation and which are truly radiation-free 
(Saeed et al., 2018). Taken together, the basic training 
on radiation safety provided for the personnel who 
work with radiation proves to be insufficient for their 
entire working period; therefore, they should receive 
additional training on specific topics at regular intervals 
(European Commission, 2014; Paolicchi et al., 2016). 
Healthcare professionals who do not have sufficient 
knowledge concerning these topics may not be able to 
perform the risk-benefit analysis in clinical practice and 
thereby may expose themselves and their patients to the 
harmful effects of radiation.
The primary aim of the present study is to investi-
gate the awareness and knowledge level concerning 
radiation safety among healthcare professionals who 
work in a radiation environment. In addition, the 
planned study aims to provide clear results about 
radiation safety from the personnel in question, and 
guide the relevant measures that can be taken in the 
long term.
There are a state, a university and a private hospital in 
the city where the research is carried out. The study 
was included in all three institutions. The study popu-
lation consisted of healthcare professionals who work 
in a radiation environment. The departments 
included in this study were Cardiology, Radiology, 
Nuclear Medicine and Radiation Oncology. 123 health 
professionals in the university hospital (Radiology: 56; 
Cardiology: 23; Radiation Oncology: 26; Nuclear 
Medicine: 20), 47 in the state hospital (Radiology: 30; 
Cardiology: 13; Nuclear Medicine: 4; no radiation 
oncology unit), and 4 in the private hospital 
(Radiology: 4; no Cardiology, Nuclear Medicine and 
radiation oncology unit) work in radiation areas 
where the study is carried out. In the study, the sam-
ple was not selected and the entire universe was tried 
to be reached. Across the three hospitals, the total 
number of healthcare professionals working in radia-
tion fields was 174, 144 of whom participated in the 
survey on a voluntary basis. As the working conditions 
(number of patient, number of imaging, physical con-
ditions, frequency of on duty etc.) are different in 
public and private health sector, all hospitals were 
included in the study. Ethics Committee approval 
was obtained prior to initiation of the study, and the 
survey was started only after obtaining separate per-
missions for each hospital.
The survey used in this study was prepared by the 
investigators after reviewing previous studies on simi-
lar subjects, and opinions were sought from experts in 
relevant fields. The survey consists of two parts and 
a total of 28 questions. The first part contains questions 
related to the demographics of healthcare profes-
sionals participating in the present study. The second 
part contains questions related to main principles and 
trainings concerning radiation safety. Questions in this 
part are particularly focused on basic information and 
trainings about radiation, tools used for the purpose of 
radioprotection in working environment, dosimeter 
usage and risk assessment. Furthermore, questions 
on patient safety, including special measures to be 
taken for women of child-bearing potential during 
procedures that involve radiation have been included 
in this part. For questions on radiation safety training, 
dosimeter usage and risk analysis, evaluation was 
based on options of either yes or no, and the reasons 
were probed in participants who indicated not using 
a dosimeter. Additionally, the participants were asked 
a question as to which procedures involve radiation in 
order to assess their level of awareness. Multiple- 
choice answers and single correct answers were used 
in questions on staff safety and patient safety.
SPSS.23 program was used for the data analysis. 
Frequency and percentage were calculated for the ana-
lysis of demographic data. For the 10 questions on 
knowledge level concerning radiation safety, each cor-
rect answer was scored as 1 and each incorrect answer 
as 0 to calculate the mean values and standard devia-
tion. The highest possible score in these questions was 
10. The differences in the level of knowledge about 
radiation safety between the groups according to 
experience, occupation and type of hospital were ana-
lyzed with one-way ANOVA. A minimum significance 
level of 0.05 was utilized during the analyzes.
Demographics obtained in the survey conducted 
among healthcare professionals who work in 
a radiation environment are listed in Table 1. 
According to the results, 72.9% of the participating 
healthcare professionals were employed in a university 
hospital, with 24.3% employed in a state hospital and 
2.8% in a private hospital while education status was 
high school in 3.5%, undergraduate/university in 70.8%, 
postgraduate in 6.9% and PhD in 18.8%. Occupational 
groups of the participants included doctors (18.8%), 
technicians (66.0%), nurses (10.4%),radiation physicists 
(4.2%) and other (0.7%). Of all the participants, 45.8% 
2 A. ZEKIOĞLU AND Ş. PARLAR
were healthcare professionals work in radiology, 19.4% 
in cardiology, 20.1% in radiation oncology and 14.6% in 
nuclear medicine. In terms of occupational experience, 
the participants were stratified as those with experience 
of less than 3 years (29.2%), 4–10 years (25.0%) and more 
than 10 years (45.8%).
Of the participants, 98.6% reported having 
knowledge of radiation protection. Among these, the 
knowledge was a result of their specialty training in 
61.8%, the training provided at the hospital they 
worked in 31.3%, the training provided at the time of 
medical equipment installation in 0.7%, personal web- 
based research in 1.4%, and interaction with fellow 
colleagues in 3.5%. Moreover, level of knowledge 
about the risks of ionizing radiation was self-rated as 
excellent by 13.2% of the participants, good by 30.6%, 
adequate by 36.1% and insufficient by 20.1%.
According to the legislation in Turkey (Ministry of 
Health, 2012; Turkey Atomic Energy Agency, 2015), 
The Radiation Safety Committee must be established 
in hospitals. These committees have duties such as 
providing radiation safety, regular training in hospi-
tals and preparing radiation safety handbook. When 
the answers to the questions on this subject are 
examined, 85.4% of the participants indicated the 
presence of a radiation safety committee at the 
hospital where they worked, 56.9% stated having 
knowledge of the scope and responsibilities of the 
committee. On the other hand, 54.2% of the partici-
pants reported the presence of a document on radia-
tion safety. Of the participants, 60.4% indicated the 
presence of periodic training on radiation safety in 
place at the hospital where they work and 63.9% 
stated that these trainings raise awareness on radia-
tion safety while 36.1% found the trainings inefficient 
in this regard (Table 2).
According to the legislation in Turkey (Ministry of 
Health, 2012), the use of a dosimeter is mandatory in 
radiation areas, and the principles of use are detailed in 
the legislation. For this reason, questions regarding 
dosimeter use and safety measures were asked. 
Regular usage of pocket dosimeter was reported by 
89.6% of the participants while 10.4% stated not using 
a pocket dosimeter. Of the 15 participants reporting 
non-usage of dosimeter, the reason was stated as not 
having a dosimeter (20%), forgetting to wear the dosi-
meter (60%) and the perception of inaccurate measure-
ments obtained with the dosimeter (20%) (Table 3). In 
addition to the dosimeter, use of lead apron was 
reported by 21.4% of the participants, with lead glass 
usage in 19.4 thyroid collar in 18.9%, lead shielding 
barriers in 17.4%, lead glasses in 8.2%, lead gloves in 
5.1% and gonad protection in 4.9% while 4.7% reported 
not using any additional protection.
In this survey study, 81.8% of 54 participants work-
ing in the radiology unit, 79.3% of the 23 participants 
working in the radiation oncology unit, 95.2% of the 20 
participants working in nuclear medicine and 27 parti-
cipants working in the cardiology unit 96.4% stated 
that they think that the risk levels of exposure to 
harmful effects of radiation in their unit are higher 
than other departments (Table 4). These results may 
be interpreted as subjective opinions provided by the 
participants with regard to the perception that the 
departments they work lead to more exposure to 
radiation than that in other departments.
Some of the participants stated that procedures 
that involve ionizing radiation, namely chest X-ray, 
mammography, PET, fluoroscopy, radiological proce-
dures, angiography, radiotherapy, bone densitometer, 
CT, scintigraphy and iodine-131 treatment do not 
Table 1. Demographic characteristics of the healthcare profes-
sionals who participated in the study.
JOURNAL OF RADIATION RESEARCH AND APPLIED SCIENCES 3
involve radiation and that procedures that do not in 
fact involve radiation, namely MRI and USG involve 
radiation (Figure 1).
Of the participants, 20.8% did not know that the 
ALARA (‘as low as reasonably achievable’) principle 
meant the lowest possible radiation dose. Similarly, 
those with incorrect answers to questions on main 
methods of radiation protection comprised 35.4% of 
the study population while 41.7% of the participants 
provided incorrect answers concerning the use of dosi-
meter with lead shielding. The rate of incorrect answers 
about the mean dose limit over five years and one year 
among radiation staff was 35.4% and 44.4%, respec-
tively. The rate of respondents who gave incorrect 
answers regarding the frequency of annual health 
checks required for radiation staff was 33.3%. 
According to the legislation, radiation workers should 
have a health check once a year (Ministry of Health, 
2012). As for questions on patient safety, approximately 
one out of three participants (29.2%) provided negative 
answers about informing patients concerning applica-
tions that involve radiation. For applications involving 
radiation to be performed in women of child-bearing 
potential, the rate of correct answers on questioning of 
pregnancy were considerably high. Similarly, the rate of 
knowing the most appropriate time for test for women 
of child-bearing potential was 67.4% (Table 5).
The arithmetic mean and standard deviation values 
of the scores of the participants in 10 questions related 
to radiation safety were calculated and given in Table 6. 
When all questions related to the subject were evalu-
ated, the average score of the participants in the ques-
tions on information level of radiation safety was 6.86 
(±1.88). In other words, considering that the possible 
highest total score was 10, the success rate was found to 
be 68.6%. Furthermore, the differences in the level of 
knowledge on radiation safety was investigated statisti-
cally between groups by occupation, experience and 
type of hospital, and no significant difference was 
seen with regard to knowledge level based on years of 
experience and type of hospital. On the other hand, the 
evaluation based on occupational groups revealed that 
radiation physicists had a significantly (p < 0.05) higher 
level of knowledge compared to other healthcare pro-
fessionals. While radiation physicists had the highest 
score with 8.16 on average, the groups of professionals 
that followed were technicians, doctor and nurses, 
respectively. Other healthcare professionals were the 
group of those with the lowest score of 4.00 on average.
The technological advances in recent years have 
increased the use of medical applications that involve 
radiation; and consequently, both patients and healthcare 
professionals are known to be exposed to higher doses of 
radiation (Schauer & Linton, 2009). The awareness and 
level of knowledge of radiation among healthcare 
Table 4. Assessment of risk levels of radiation exposure by 
department.
Figure 1. Which of the following are applications that involve ionizing radiation?
4 A. ZEKIOĞLU AND Ş. PARLAR
professionals directly involved in radiation-containing 
applications is highly important and effective in terms of 
risks that may arise for both the patients and themselves 
due to excess radiation during the tests (European Society 
of Radiology, 2011). The present study aimed to investi-
gate the awareness and level of knowledge of applica-
tions that involve radiation and radiation safety among 
healthcare professionals who work in a radiation environ-
ment with radiation exposure.
Results of this study revealed that the rate of 
correct answers was 68.6% (6.86 correct answers 
on average in 10 questions) for questions on radia-
tion safety among all healthcare professionals. 
A study conducted in healthcare professionals who 
are continuously involved in radiation-containing 
applications showed a success rate of 66.14% in 
theoretical knowledge across participants (4.63 cor-
rect answers on average in 7 questions) (Borgen & 
Stranden, 2014). The success rate in the present 
study was higher than that in comparative studies 
performed with other healthcare professionals 
(Khan et al., 2018). Nearly all of the participants in 
this study (98.6%) stated that they had knowledge 
of radiation protection and that they mostly (61.8%) 
gained this knowledge during training. Taking into 
account that the target audience is the group of 
healthcare professionals who actively perform appli-
cations that involve radiation, the knowledge of 
radiation safety provided during occupational 
training may be predicted to contribute to the suc-
cess rate. According to the legislation in Turkey 
(Ministry of Health, 2012; Turkey Atomic Energy 
Agency, 2015), radiation safety committees are 
responsible for radiation safety in hospitals. In-ser-
vice training are given to physicians, nurses and 
technicians. Training generally organized once 
a year by radiation committees. (Ministry of Health, 
2012). However, there is no information about 
whether any tests or examinations have been car-
ried out to assess the knowledge level of health 
professionals on radiation safety during training. 
Based on this situation, most of the participants 
who took place in this survey reported the presence 
of a radiation safety committee at the hospital 
where they worked (85.4%), that periodic training 
were in place (60.4%) and that training was effec-
tive in raising awareness on radiation safety (63.4%). 
It may be said that periodic training conducted for 
healthcare professionals working with radiation 
increases their knowledge level about radiation 
safety. Additionally, interactive and case-based 
training modalities are stated to be more effective 
in terms of raising awareness (Sheng et al., 2016).
In applications that involve radiation, the protection 
of both the personnel and patients from radiation is 
directly related to the level of awareness. In the present 
study, healthcare professionals in cardiology and 
nuclear medicine units stated that their risk of radia-
tion exposure was higher than that of those in other 
units. The other group who reported a perception of 
higher risk of exposure to radiation was those who 
work in the radiology department. The radioactive 
sources utilized in nuclear medicine and the interven-
tional procedures performed more frequently in cardi-
ology and radiology departments result in increased 
radiation exposure for the staff. Therefore, healthcare 
professionals who work in these departments use pro-
tective apparatuses such as lead shielding, lead glass 
and thyroid protection. However, 10.4% of the partici-
pants in the present study reported mostly forgetting 
to use a dosimeter. This translates into the presence of 
Table 6. Comparison of knowledge level by occupation, 
experience and type of hospital.
JOURNAL OF RADIATION RESEARCH AND APPLIED SCIENCES 5
a group -although a small one- that does not show the 
necessary caution/importance in this regard among 
healthcare professionals who work in a radiation 
environment.
Both the types and numbers of procedures that 
involve radiation used in diagnosis and treatment 
have increased considerably with the advances in tech-
nology (UNSCEAR, 2000). Ensuring that healthcare pro-
fessionals have knowledge of all applications that 
involve radiation is effective in preventing the excess 
radiation that may result from unnecessary examina-
tions both for themselves and their patients. Almost all 
of the healthcare professionals who participated in the 
present study answered correctly that MRI and ultra-
sound are among the non-radiation procedures per-
formed for diagnostic-therapeutic purposes. However, 
the rate of those answering incorrectly that nuclear 
radiation tests such as PET, bone densitometry and 
iodine-131 treatment are non-radiation procedures 
was considerably high. Of the participants, 29.2% sta-
ted PET as a non-radiation procedure while this rate 
was 45.8% for bone densitometry and 45.8% for 
iodine-131 treatment. Bone densitometry is performed 
to assess bone density using very low energy X-rays. 
However, in both PET scan and iodine-131 treatment, 
the patient continues to emit radiation to their sur-
rounding after the procedure due to the radioactive 
material administered during the application. Since 
nearly all of the participants stated that they have 
knowledge of radiation protection, it is an unexpected 
result to obtain a high rate of incorrect answers con-
cerning such tests.
Most of the studies investigating the level of knowl-
edge and awareness about radiation safety are conducted 
among doctors, students and patients, who do not work 
continuously in a radiation environment. In particular, the 
awareness and knowledge level of doctors who request 
patients to undergo procedures that involve radiation 
have been shown to be extremely important in terms of 
patient safety and reducing the dose exposure of patients 
(Campanella et al., 2017; Chun-sing et al., 2012). The 
questions asked in these studies are mostly about the 
dose of the requested radiological imaging procedure 
(e.g., tomography/CT), the risk of cancer or side effects 
that may occur (Campanella et al., 2017; Chun-sing et al., 
2012; Ramanathan & Ryan, 2015; Senemtaşi Ünal et al., 
2018). In the present study, knowledge-based questions 
were asked about radiation safety, such as those on 
ALARA principle, main methods of radiation protection 
and dose limits. Questions about the necessity of inform-
ing patients in the event of an imaging test involving 
radiation and the procedures to be performed for patients 
who are likely to become pregnant were also included. 
Taking into account the fact that the target audience 
herein was a group of healthcare professionals who con-
tinuously work in a radiation environment, questions on 
protecting themselves and patients from the radiation 
arising from relevant procedures were designed as well. 
According to the results, one fifth of the participants gave 
incorrect answers concerning the ALARA principle and 
approximately one in three participants did not know 
the main methods of radiation protection. The rate of 
those who provided incorrect answers about the use of 
dosimeter with lead shielding and about the mean dose 
limit over five years and one year were found to be quite 
high. Almost all of our participants stated having received 
training on radiation safety and most reported atten-
dance at regular trainings. Although it is compulsory to 
inform the patient about harmful effects of radiation 
related to the procedure to be performed in our country, 
it was observed that some considered this unnecessary. 
While it is mostly stated that ‘pregnancy interrogation 
should take place when performing the necessary radi-
ological procedures for pregnant patients or those with 
child-bearing potential’, one in three participants pro-
vided an incorrect answer about who should do this 
and how. Information on precautions to be taken during 
radiological procedures conducted for pregnant patients 
or those with child-bearing potential have been described 
in several publications and guidelines (American College 
of Radiology, 2018).
With regard to answers on radiation protection of the 
staff and patients, knowledge gaps were noted, even in 
those who had received and continued to receive training 
on radiation safety. Studies have revealed that healthcare 
professionals who continuously work in a radiation envir-
onment have a higher level of knowledge of radiation 
safety compared to others, although insufficient training 
is observed even in these groups, highlighting the fact 
that such training should be provided not only through 
working life but also during specialty training (Borgen & 
Stranden, 2014; R. K. Lee et al., 2012; Paolicchi et al., 2016). 
In the present study, level of knowledge about radiation 
safety was evaluated by experience level, occupation and 
type of hospital, and no significant difference was found 
(p > 0.05) for experience and type of hospital. Several 
studies have shown that occupational experience 
increases knowledge level, in other words, further training 
contributes to level of knowledge favorably 
(Macía-Suárez & Sánchez-Rodríguez, 2018; Senemtaşi 
Ünal et al., 2018). In the present study, the rates of correct 
answers were similar in the groups with less than three 
years of experience and more than 10 years of experience, 
and no significant difference was observed between 
these groups. While the unwillingness of senior employ-
ees to change their habits and update their knowledge is 
expected (Szarmach et al., 2015) to make a difference 
between the level of knowledge, a different result was 
obtained in this study. It is considered that not being able 
to make radiation safety training systematic, not attend-
ing to training due to work intensity, and not evaluating 
the training with objective measurement tools (pre-test, 
post-test, scale etc.), may cause lack of awareness and 
level of knowledge of the participants to be similar.
6 A. ZEKIOĞLU AND Ş. PARLAR
In the evaluation based on occupational groups, 
radiation physicists were associated with a significantly 
higher level of knowledge about radiation safety com-
pared to other healthcare professionals (p < 0.05). The 
other groups with correct answers to relevant questions 
were technicians, doctors, nurses, and other healthcare 
professionals, in this respective order. A study investi-
gating the awareness on radiation safety among nurses 
who work in the same department with radiology tech-
nicians did not reveal a significant difference between 
these two occupational groups (Senemtaşi Ünal et al., 
2018). In the study presented herein, the finding that 
radiation physicists were those with the highest level of 
knowledge was not unexpected taking into account 
that they are in charge of taking necessary precautions 
for radiation protection who may also provide training 
on this subject matter. The lowest level of knowledge 
noted in nurses and other healthcare professionals is 
likely to result from the lack of training in this regard 
during their basic training and knowledge gained only 
through periodic trainings.
In conclusion, insufficient level of knowledge about 
applications that involve radiation is a highly important 
parameter in radiation protection both for healthcare 
professionals and patients. The present study demon-
strated an insufficient level of knowledge and aware-
ness on radiation safety, even in the occupational 
groups that continuously work in a radiation environ-
ment. In order for all hospital personnel to work safely in 
applications that involve radiation, all of the necessary 
conditions need to be fulfilled. This may ensure that 
both the staff and patients and their relatives are 
exposed to the lowest possible radiation dose. For this; 
periodic trainings should be conducted in hospitals and 
training content should include all applications that 
involve radiation and be specific to the relevant clinic. 
Regular training programs should also be provided for 
other healthcare professionals who do not continuously 
work in a radiation environment but are still subject to 
radiation exposure. Pre-test and post-test exercises 
should be performed in order to increase the effective-
ness of the trainings, and interactive case studies speci-
fic to the clinic should be included in the program. With 
the establishment of radiation safety committees in all 
hospitals, it would be possible to monitor and conduct 
regular trainings. And finally, with electronic learning 
programs which may be implemented at national 
level, all relevant persons would have access to these 
programs.
Due to ethical factors, identity information was not 
obtained from healthcare professionals who participated 
in the study. Furthermore, the responses were not shared 
with third parties (such as hospital management). Based 
on this, the answers are thought to reflect the actual 
situations. In the study, using only a questionnaire is 
a limitation. In future studies, besides the questionnaire, 
in-depth interviews with healthcare professionals can be 
used to determine the main causes of situations objec-
tively, such as lack of information, lack of awareness.