Ad-hoc networks are the wireless networks dedicated for a
specific function. Mobile Ad-hoc Network (MANET) architecture
is imperative for any critical communication scenario especially
in the context of Internet of Things (IoT) based Next Generation
Cyber-Physical Systems (NG-CPS). It supports infrastructure less
and highly scalable wireless sensor network. However, MANET
architecture has many deployment challenges for resource man-
agement to ensure the typical application specific Quality of Ser-
vice (QoS) requirements. 5G standards given by 3GPP and next
generation mobile communication like 6G support MANET archi-tecture with Device-to-Device (D2D) framework for many poten-
tial IoT-based applications such as Internet of Vehicles (IoV),
Flying ad-hoc networks (FANETs) etc. The major challenge in the
deployment of MANET is ensuring QoS requirements. Most of the
MENET’s TCP/IP protocol stack implementation suggests an IEEE
standard that works on
1) Wireless Physical layer (Layer-I)
2) Ad-hoc communication framework of Distributed Coordi-
nated Function (DCF) based (Layer-II) Media Access Control
(MAC)
3) Network layer (Layer-III) with IPv4 / IPv6 based Logical
address and routing
4) Transport Layer (layer-IV) supporting either TCP or UDP
5) Application Layer (Layer-V) protocols for specific End-to-End
service requirements.
MANET is the combination of a group of self-organized nodes.
There is no central management between the nodes. Each node is
N. Hasan, A. Mishra and Arun Kumar Ray Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal 35 (2022) 101099equipped with a transceiver which enables it to act as a router as
well as a host. Each node supports variety of applications. These
nodes enjoy the advantage of adaptability that makes MANET a
multi-functional network. MANET is suggested strongly for IoT
applications as the conventional networks can’t provide its services
[1,22]. Scarcity of bandwidth, constrained power resources, limited
transmission range, mobility of the nodes and storage imitation are
considered as weakness of MANET. These weaknesses are impor-
tant aspects to support QoS. Clustering the network provide a solu-
tion to enhance QoS [3]. However, clustering the network increases
the complexity of its working mechanism.
Cross-layer can be defined as the infrastructural layer of the
TCP/IP stack that optimizes different parameters across the five
layers. It is one of the proposed solutions in MANET for its develop-
ing requirements, addressing the shortcomings and coping with
the resources. It is the strict and fixed design of the TCP/IP stack
that cannot cope with the dynamic structure of MANET. It is not
just any one layer of TCP/IP stack which is sufficient to address
the challenges of performance optimization of MANETs strictly as
per the QoS requirements of the scenario specific applications.
However, a Cross-layer design will provide the best results in
terms of performance enhancement as we are tuning relevant net-
work parameters associated with multiple layers of TCP/IP stack.
Cross-layer provides solutions for the difficulty in MANET design
by minimizing the energy consumption and makes enhancements
in QoS [2,4,5].
Due to random access MAC and other stochastic components of
MANET, it is not viable to model the overall QoS requirements with
help of deterministic modeling to ensure network performance.
The research question then is: How to address this challenge of
uncertainty in designing the cross layer? Under this circumstance,
it is evident to use soft-computing techniques to model the MANET
as a Cross-layer design problem. Recently there have been tremen-
dous development in the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Machine Learning (ML) due to more computational resources of
recent processors (CPU/GPU). However, these AI and ML based
techniques depends on huge data-sets and are processor as well
storage hungry applications. Without large amount of training data
these techniques do trade-off with accuracy. However, Fuzzy Logic
System (FLS) is simple to implement as compared to AI and ML
based techniques. Fuzzy logic is based on formulation of fuzzy
set and a rule-based inference model with the help of linguistic
variables and Membership function (MF). FLS uses antecedent
and consequent variables and those are relatively easier to model
especially for constraint power mobile computational units like
MANET nodes. In this paper, we have considered FLS for modeling
our Cross-layer design of MANET for improvements in QoS param-
eters like Throughput, Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) and End-to-End
(E2E) delay. We have included many parameters across the TCP/IP
stack. Different parameters are considered from all the five layers
of TCP/IP stack implementation. These parameters are used to
model the fuzzy logic system to enhance the overall network per-
formance. Fig. 1 shows Fuzzy Logic System based cross-layer
design approach in MANET for QoS sensitive IoT-based applica-
tions for Next-generation Cyber Physical System (NG-CPS).
This paper introduces a Fuzzy Logic System based cross layer
(FLS-CL) for MANET. Further, we have implemented part of our
proposed system using Fuzzy logic toolbox in MATLAB. The results
of the FLS-CL system are used on a QualNet network simulator
environment for testing, validation and evaluation of network per-
formance. The results of our proposed FLS-CL design for MANET
shows major QoS improvements and results are quite promising.
MANET performance after cross layer optimization has been
enhanced remarkably as compared with its performance without
cross layer. The performance was tested using PDR, throughput
and end to end delay.2
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 1 includes
the introduction. Section 2 presents the related work. Section 3 dis-
cusses proposed FLS-CL System model. Section 4 presents simula-
tion study. Section 5 presents results and analysis of results
obtained is inferred with discussion in section 6. Finally, section
7 concludes the paper with future research directions.2. Related work
MANET captures the interest of many researchers due to its
suitability in many applications. Many researchers have discussed
different methodologies for QoS performance enhancement of
MANET [6,7]. One of these methodologies is the cross-layer design.
Anish et al. proposed a cross-layer scheme that links the phys-
ical and MAC layer to optimize the power consumption through
controlling packets (RTS/CTS) [8]. When the transmitter senses
the failure of RTS, it changes the minimum transmitting power.
Optimization of energy consumption and enhancement in QoS
are the target of this work. Asha et al. proposed a cross-layer
scheme for efficient frequency selection. Channel modeling helps
to estimate radio resource allocation [11]. A node selects a channel
to transmit the data depending on channel frequency, path loss,
channel gain, and PDF of each flow. This approach provides an
enhancement of throughput and minimizing end to end delay for
video transmission. Dhakad et al. proposed a fuzzy logic system
(FLS) to enhance Ad-hoc On-demand Distance Vector (AODV) per-
formance in MANET [9]. The rules of the FLS were set to optimize
End-to-End Delay, throughput, and Packet Delivery Ratio concern-
ing network size. They have obtained promising results with Qual-
Net 6.1. Sarao et al. proposed an ANFIS system for optimizing
packet size [10]. The fuzzy logic system of 4  1 interfaces used
throughput, normalized routing load, the data packet received,
and end-to-end delay as antecedent variables with packet size as
consequent variable. A new model for QoS calculation was pro-
posed considering Stable Energy Aware Ad hoc Routing protocol
(QSEAAR) [12]. They have used Fuzzy Logic system tool box in
MATLAB and NS-2 for their work.
Recent state-of-the-art in MANET research is QoS-aware rout-
ing protocol presented by Singal et al. [45]. Some QoS enhance-
ment research suggest techniques like Deep/Machine Learning
schemes. Cross-layer design based Deep reinforcement learning
is proposed by Nguyen et al. in 2021 [44]. Cognitive Radio MANETs
Deep Q-Network design for QoS improvements proposed by Tran
et al. in 2021 [43]. Hasan et al. in 2022 have proposed cross-
layer optimization aspects of MANETs for QoS sensitive IoT appli-
cations [46]. Table 1 provides a comparison between some cross-
layer models.3. Proposed fuzzy logic based cross-layer (FLS-CL) design:
System model
MANET is a wireless ad-hoc network comprising of mobile
nodes. MANET works on a non-infrastructure, decentralized net-
work architecture. Each node has the ability to control and adjust
data transmission to work as a router or relaying node or as an
end node. When a node is added to the ad-hoc network, the node
needs to establish a route dynamically with the other adjacent
nodes. Contribution in the transmission process is affected by the
degree of closeness to the destination and depending on the uti-
lized routing algorithm. The dynamic network condition in MANET
has many technical challenges especially the resource allocation
due to ad-hoc and infrastructure-less operation hence conven-
tional TCP/IP stack implementation becomes much difficult and
may not provide optimized QoS. Providing a good QoS is a big chal-
lenge in MANET regarding the type of application like on demand
Fig. 1. Fuzzy Logic System based Cross-Layer design for Next-gen Cyber Physical System.
N. Hasan, A. Mishra and Arun Kumar Ray Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal 35 (2022) 101099applications [18]. The mobility of the nodes gives the link non-
stability with time, which requires more tracking of the adjacent
nodes and periodic update of the available routes [19]. The wire-
less medium shared between the nodes increases the challenges
through contention and congestion issues as it used contention-
based media access control schemes due to ad-hoc network. The
limited resources contribute in reducing network life span and
degrading the performance of MANET. All these factors together
affect the QoS parameters, End to End (E2E) delay, Packet Delivery3
Ratio (PDR), and Throughput. Cross layer provides a vital solution
that MANET needs to for its stable performance. Cross-Layer design
is motivated for considering parameters across many layers of TCP/
IP reference model.3.1. Cross-layer design approach in MANET
The layered scheme of TCP/IP stack isn’t flexible for MANET
design, and may weaken its performance. Each layer has a bidirec-
N. Hasan, A. Mishra and Arun Kumar Ray Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal 35 (2022) 101099tional inter-layer communication with the adjacent layers. Non-
adjacent layers don’t interfere with the other layers’ processes
[20]. The need for adaptation of each layer to cope with the varia-
tions in MANET nature based on a time scale is a big necessity that
suggests cross layer. What can come as an emergent solution to
makes TCP/IP stack supports MANET design. Cross layer enables
lower layers to control the parameters of the higher layers and
adapt them with the changes in the network (Mobility, signal
strength, channel characteristics etc.) [21]. Cross layer is designed
to meet QoS requirements and improve the network performance.
It enables non-adjacent layers to adjust their parameters using
adaptive methodologies. The Cross-layer design proposed in this
paper, is following the adaption required between the layers of
TCP/IP stack with some network parameters like mobility, data
rates and no. of nodes to provide an optimal value that may adapt
to the dynamic deployment scenario of MANET. Generally, cross-
layer combines two or more than two layers. The cross-layer
design proposed in this paper involves five layers of the TCP/IP pro-
tocol stack. Table 2 provides the parameters utilized by our cross-
layer model.3.2. Fuzzy logic system based cross-layer design
Mobile ad hoc networks are automated networks that are
designed to support variety of application. As MANET is a battery
constrained depending nodes, it’s basic matter to have a control
scheme for power resource [30]. Hop count affects the end to
end delay as MANET has no fixed infrastructure [31]. Performance
of MANET depends highly on the routing protocol utilized, with the
increase of network size [32]. Application rate has its effect on the
performance of the routing protocol and QoS parameters [33].
Retransmission times compensate the enormous received frames
at MAC layer cased by wireless links or mobility of the nodes
[34]. Selecting the physical layer standard (IEEE802.11b,
IEEE802.11a) has its role on transmission process like optimization
of energy consumption, error correction, reducing interference and
jamming [35]. Fuzzy logic approach is a part of soft computing that
interacts with the imprecision and approximate reasoning. It’s the
formalization of the capability to reason and make rational deci-
sions in an environment of non-precise data with uncertainty,
incompleteness, conflicting of its information [36]. Complexities
mean that the knowledge about the environment and the deci-
sions’ consequences aren’t constant and modality. Uncertainty is
the concept of non-precise value that may class a type of data in
order to satisfy human requirements for some control systems.
The fuzzy logic and fuzzy decisions are tools that help taking deci-
sions under the concepts of uncertainty and complexity [37]. The
uncertain rule base, is used by our model, forms the controller ofTable 2
Cross-layer Parameters considered for Fuzzy Logic System Implementation.
Layer Parameters Discussion
Cross Layer Application
Layer
Application rate (Packets/
sec.)
Application rate affects the
and power consumption.
Transport
Layer
TCP/UDP Determining the relation of
protocols on the performanc
Network
Layer
Hop Count (No, of hops) Hop count determines path
This affects the overall delay
Data-Link
Layer
Number of
Retransmission
Retransmission times affect
since the packet will be drop
Physical
Layer
Transmission Power
(mW)
MANET is a constraint powe
consumption are one of the
Adaptive Modulation and
Coding (AMC)
The utilization of IEEE 802.1
utilizing OFDM
Mobility -Node speed To adjust the overall connec
4
the cross layer to adjust the parameters from each layer and to
get the optimal value that contribute in enhancing QoS to improve
MANET performance. We conclude that the flexibility of fuzzy logic
system enables providing cross-layer design for adapting MANET
nature. Fuzzy logic system has its efficiency in MANET concerning
QoS enhancement, improving the performance of routing proto-
cols, and controlling different parameters of the protocol stack
[38,39].
Fig. 2 provides the systemmodel for cross layer (FLS-CL) design.
Studying the effects of each parameter on network performance
literately and through simulation is represented the first step in
this work. In this first stage, we set the network characteristics,
the parameters of each layer and the environment to be studied.
This stage helped in inferring the rules for fuzzy logic system,
and it is done using QualNet simulator. Next stage included the
design of fuzzy logic system (membership function, rule set, ranges
of the parameters) for cross layer (FLS-CL) test and implementa-
tion. Final stage is the implementation of cross layer based on
fuzzy logic by simulating different scenarios of MANET using Qual-
Net, and applying the values of antecedence to get the optimal
values of the consequents and apply it to these scenarios. Finally,
a comparative study has been done between with and without pro-
posed FLS-CL for evaluation of MANET performance in the first
stage and after applying our proposed FLS based cross layer design.
Fig. 3 provides the block diagram of proposed Fuzzy Logic Sys-
tem based Cross-Layer (FLS-CL) design. Fuzzy logic system pro-
vides the adjusting factor to get the optimal value of the
consequents depending on the crisp inputs of the antecedents.
The fuzzification process converts the crisp inputs to the corre-
sponding fuzzy set. Our cross-layer design is based on Fuzzy logic
system. Fuzzification, rule designing, aggregation, and defuzzifica-
tion are the fuzzy logic processes. In our proposed model we are
considering three paraments as our antecedent fuzzy variables 1.
Node speed (m/s), 2. End-to-End delay (ms) and, 3. Packet Delivery
Ratio (PDR) in %. Similarly, we are considering five consequent
variables as: 1. Transmission Power (mW) and 2. Adaptive Modu-
lation and Coding (AMC) form physical layer of TCP/IP layer archi-
tecture. 3. Number of Retransmission from data-link layer of TCP/IP
layer architecture. 4. Hop count (Number of hops: since it’s an ad-
hoc network) from network layer of TCP/IP stack and 5. Application
rate (packets/sec.) as a parameter from application layer of TCP/IP
stack.
In our FLS-CL system modeling we have considered three ante-
cedent fuzzy variables from physical, transport and application
layer of TCP/IP stack and five consequent variables from physical,
data-link, network and application layer of TCP/IP stack. As multi-
ple layers of TCP/IP stacks are involved in modeling the Fuzzy logic
system to enhance the overall QoS performance of the MANET weMajor work
transmission process regarding queuing, storage Sadagopan et al.
[23]
connection-less UDP and connection-oriented TCP
e
V. Sharma et al.
[24]
links that the packet needs to transient through.
in the network.
Sahu1 et al. [25]
s the probability of receiving the packets,
ped after limit number of retransmissions
Jabbar et al. [26]
r resource network, enhancements of energy
goals of the cross layer
Li et al. [27]
1a comes to provide higher transmission rates Daisuke Takedal
et al. [28]
tion session with the mobility of the nodes B. Divecha et al.
[29]
Fig. 2. System model for Fuzzy Logic System based Cross-Layer (FLS-CL) design for QoS improvement in MANET.
Fig. 3. Proposed Fuzzy Logic System based Cross-Layer (FLS-CL) design.
may term it as a fuzzy logic system based cross-layer design to
improve QoS in MANET. Fig. 4 shows Block diagram of fuzzy logic
design used for cross layer.
The proposed FLS-CL model adjusts the consequents based on
Node speed, End to End delay (latency) and Packet Delivery Ratio
(PDR) as they are influencing the QoS evaluation of overall network
performance. These parameters are the inputs of cross-layer model
which we will mention as antecedents. FLS-CL adjusts transmis-
sion power, AMC, number of retransmissions, hop count and appli-
cation rate for a MANET which are the consequents variable
considered in our fuzzy logic system.
In our model, interference engine is based on the QoS parame-
ters with three antecedent fuzzy variables and five consequents
variable. The fuzzification process converts the crisp inputs to
the corresponding fuzzy sets as shown in Table 3. We used triangu-
lar and trapezoidal membership function to represent the fuzzy
sets of antecedent variables. In the antecedent variables we have
three fuzzy levels (Low, Moderate and High).
Table 4. We used triangular and trapezoidal membership func-
tion to represent the fuzzy sets of consequent variables. Here we
have nine fuzzy levels: 1. High Increase (HI), 2. Medium Increase
(MI), 3. Low Increase (LI), 4. Very Low Increase (VLI), 5. No Change
(NC), 6. Very Low Decrease (VLD), 7. Low Decrease (LD), 8. Medium
Decrease (MD) and 9. High Decrease (HD). These are considered to
be our linguistic variables.
Aggregation is done based on Max-min composition [40].
Defuzzification is based on the centroid of area (COA) method. Each
antecedent has 3 fuzzy sets that combine the fuzzy rule set of
3  3  3 = 27 rules. The rule base is given in Table 5. For example,
he following rules are used in the fuzzy inference system for the
fuzzy variable ‘retransmission’. Similarly, all the rules can be writ-
ten alike.
Fig. 4. Fuzzy Logic System for Cross layer.
N. Hasan, A. Mishra and Arun Kumar Ray Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal 35 (2022) 101099Rule 1: If Node speed is Low, End-to-End delay is Low and PDR
is Low then retransmission is Low increase.
Rule 2: If Node speed is Low, End-to-end (E2E) delay is Low and
PDR is Moderate then retransmission is Very low increase.
The inference system and the defuzzification process is
described as below. For ith fuzzy rule, the consequent fuzzy vari-
able i.e. Retransmission is determined using Eqs. (1) and (2).
lRi wð Þ ¼ Min lAi xð Þ;lBi yð Þ;lCi zð Þ 
i ¼ 1;2; ::::;27 ð1Þ
lRðwÞ ¼ maxflRiðwÞg ð2Þ
Where, lAiðxÞ;lBiðyÞ;lCiðzÞ are the fuzzy sets corresponding to node
speed, E2E delay and PDR respectively. lRiðwÞ is the fuzzy set corre-
sponding to number of re-transmissions. The output fuzzy set after
the inference is denoted as lRðwÞ. The de-fuzzification is obtained
using Equation (3) as shown below to get the de-fuzzified value
as w.
w ¼
R
lR wð ÞwdwR
lR wð Þdw ð3Þ
The above process is repeated for the remaining output fuzzy
variables (consequents) such as AMC, Transmission power, Appli-
cation rate and Hop count denoted as lMðwÞ;lTðwÞ;lPðwÞ;lHðwÞ
respectively. The defuzzified value of the output variables are used
for the QualNet simulation of MANET.
This work uses triangular and trapezoidal membership func-
tion. The MFs (fuzzy sets) with its crisp range are given in Table 4.
The ranges and the linguistic variables of each parameter are pro-
vided in the same table. The linguistic variables of the fuzzy set for
the cross-layer inputs are low, moderate, and high (Table 3). While
the linguistic variables of the consequents are HI, MI, LI, VLI, NC,6
VLD, LD, MD, HD. For data rates of AMC, we used linguistic vari-
ables based on the order of the modulation and coding scheme.
The linguistic variables are named: unchanged, BPSK 0.5, BPSK
0.75, QPSK 0.5, QPSK 0.75, 16QAM 0.5, 16QAM 0.75, 64QAM 0.5,
and 64QAM 0.75. We used triangular and trapezoidal membership
function to represent the fuzzy sets. Fuzzification is based on AND
operation. Aggregation is done based on Max process. Based on
degree of the rules with membership functions of the input, output
respectively corresponding to the rule i, x is the crisp input, ‘i’ is the
order of the rule, and y is the crisp output then the crisp output for
k rules can be obtained [41,42]. The crisp output can be obtained
from all the rules of the fuzzy sets. We implemented a rule degree
as ‘10. Different weights result that the rule with less weight will be
neglected when firing the rules. In this model all the rules have the
same degree of importance which is the unity. Table 5 provides the
rule base of fuzzy logic based cross-layer model.
Fig. 5 shows an illustration of fuzzy logic system implementa-
tion graphically for two sample rules. The three antecedent fuzzy
variables with membership function (MF) are shown and the firing
x1, y1, z1 for finding the first crisp output of consequent variable
number of re-transmissions is obtained based on one sample
rule-1 implementation. Similarly, the second rule is implemented
for finding another consequent variable application rate. Point to
be noted there are total 27 rules (3  3  3 based on three antece-
dent variables) and five consequent variables, hence there are up to
(27  5 = 135 possible combinations or iterations based on firing).
A crisp value can be obtained after de-fuzzification to implement
on Network simulator QualNet to get QoS improvements. This
design is based on the Mamdani system. This proposed FLS-CL is
implemented based on the If-then rule base set (27 rules). Hence,
when crisp inputs are provided the system would generate crisp
outputs.
Defuzzification is based on the centroid method. This method is
based on calculating the central point of the shape obtained from
aggregation process (combining the results in one graphical repre-
sentation). Table 6 provides the results after fuzzy logic system
based cross layer implementation. These results represent the
input values to be applied in QualNet simulations of the next
stage. At the node speed of 10 m/s and the simulation time is
50 s, the transmission power is 774 mw, the packet rate is 11
packet/second, the data rate is 18 MHz, the no. of retransmissions
is 5 and the number of hop counts used is 18. The results were used
in four MANET scenarios small, medium, and large network sizes
with different simulation and node speeds. The same results were
also used to compare MANET performance with/out cross layer
concerning the studying parameters.
N. Hasan, A. Mishra and Arun Kumar Ray Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal 35 (2022) 101099The values of PDR and end to end delay were applied in a fuzzy
logic-based cross layer for a particular speed and time. Fuzzy logic,
then provided the optimal values of consequents. The discussion of
the results is provided in the simulation results and discussion
section.4. Simulation study
In order to validate our proposed FLS-CL, we have created a
simulation-based testbed using QualNet network simulator and
used MATLAB for fuzzy logic system implementation. The system
implementation using simulation can be classified into three dis-
tinct stages. We run them sequentially to validate our design by
showing QoS performance improvements through QualNet.
Fig. 6 shows the flowchart of simulation study showing three
stages and their working steps.4.1. First stage
The first stage included MANET simulation when the number of
nodes was 50 nodes. We used variable values of the parameters to7
study their effect on end to end delay, PDR, throughput, and the
transmission power. Throughput, PDR and the end to end delay,
are calculated as the following:
a) Throughput = Total data size received in bits/ Time spent
between Transmission and Reception
b) Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) = No. of packet received/ Total
no. of packet sent
c) End to End Delay (Latency) represents the time that data suf-
fers in its travel from source to destination E2E.
We start our work by studying the effect of the selected param-
eters on the QoS parameters. In this stage we studied the effect of
node speed, AMC, application rate, hop count, and retransmission
times on a given transmission power, end to end delay and the
PDR. Fig. 7 shows the simulation environment using QualNet. This
figure provides one of the scenarios used to evaluate MANET per-
formance. The other scenarios differed in no. of nodes, and node
speed, and the values of the considered parameters.
Depending on the results obtained from this study, we set the
rule base provided in Table 3. This study helped in selecting the
ranges of the antecedents and consequents. Also, it provided the
Fig. 5. Rule based Fuzzy logic system implementation in Cross-layer design for MANET.
N. Hasan, A. Mishra and Arun Kumar Ray Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal 35 (2022) 101099information on how QoS parameters and the required transmission
power change regarding node speed, AMC, retransmission times,
hop count and application rate. Based on the obtained data and
the analytical study we designed our fuzzy logic system based
cross layer (FLS-CL) design.
4.2. Second stage
This stage included MATLAB implementation for fuzzy logic
design. It included opting the membership functions for both the
antecedents and consequents, designing the rule set base, and set-
ting the aggregation and defuzzification processes.8
If-Then rules are applied in the fuzzy logic system to get the
crisp values of the consequent variables. The 3-D plots of the con-
sequent variables with respect to the antecedent variables are pro-
vided in the Fig. 8.
4.3. Third stage
This stage includes MANET simulation in QualNet using the
obtained values of the consequents. After that, we compared the
results of PDR, end to end delay and throughput with their results
without cross layer implementation. This comparison proved the
capability of our cross-layer model to enhance the QoS in a very
N. Hasan, A. Mishra and Arun Kumar Ray Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal 35 (2022) 101099interesting result. Discussion of the results is presented in the next
section.5. Results and analysis
This section describes results obtained from implementation of
both cross-layer and without cross-layer system to provide a per-
formance comparison. The implementation happens through four
different scenarios. Each scenario involves different set of simula-
tions as stated below:
1. Scenario-1: MANET with varying number of nodes (Network
Size)
2. Scenario-2: MANET with varying node speed (Mobility)
3. Scenario-3: MANET with varying AMC (Modulation and Data-
rate)
4. Scenario-4: MANET with varying number of retransmissions
(re-transmission)
The FLS-CL adapted the parameters to make some kind of com-
pensating. This process adjusts the energy consumption in the
transmission mode with the other parameters. FLS-CL provided a
trade-off between the utilized parameters. This resulted a very
remarkable enhancement in QoS comparing with QoS without
cross layer. The following sections provides Simulation Results of
Fuzzy Logic System based cross-layer optimization for MANET con-
cerning different scenarios.
For the above four scenarios for both connection-less User Data-
gram Protocol (UDP) based CBR traffic as well as connection-
oriented Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) based FTP applica-
tion traffic have been considered for the simulation study.
Simulation Environment: Simulation environment has been set
using QualNet simulator. Table 7 provides simulation environ-
ment parameters for all the four scenarios.5.1. Scenario-1: MANET with varying number of nodes (Network Size)
Simulation Results: The obtained results for PDR, throughput,
and end to end delay were compared with the values obtained
when inferring simulation for fuzzy sets for cross layer design.9
Table 8 provides the numerical results of the simulations. We
notice an enhancement in QoS after cross layer implementation.
The following figures provide MANET performance regarding
PDR, throughput, and end to end delay with/out cross layer (FLS-
CL) optimization concerning the number of nodes.
Fig. 9 shows the impact of our novel Fuzzy Logic based cross
layer (FLS-CL) design optimization on PDR for CBR and FTP applica-
tions. With increasing network size, PDR increased for FTP. The
retransmission of TCP protocol provided high PDR for FTP. For
CBR, PDR decreased with increasing network size. For CBR, our pro-
posed FLS-CL has improved the PDR by an average of 17.76 % with
respect to without cross-layer case, while for FTP cross layer opti-
mization has improved PDR by an average of 3.09 %.
Fig. 10 shows the throughput with respect to the no. of nodes.
For CBR application, our novel Fuzzy Logic based cross layer (FLS-
CL) design has enhanced the throughput of the network compared
to without FLS-CL. For FTP application, cross layer optimization has
provided a good enhancement in the throughput while increasing
the network size. An average of 54.4 % increase has been noticed
for FTP with proposed FLS-CL Throughput of CBR application
increased after applying FLS-CL. In-case of CBR an average of
34.45 % improvement has been noticed in throughput with pro-
posed FLS-CL.
Fig. 11 shows the end to end (E2E) delay with respect to net-
work size. The end to end delay increased with increasing the no.
of nodes. The result shows a staggering improvement in case of
CBR. The E2E delay has reduced by an average of 99.32 % after
applying our proposed FLS-CL design with respect to default value
without FLS-CL. However, in case of FTP the improvement is
49.27 % overall reduction of E2E delay after applying FLS-CL.
5.2. Scenario-2: MANET with varying node speed (Mobility)
Simulation Results: The obtained results for PDR, and end to
end delay were compared with the values obtained after inferring
fuzzy sets and applying cross layer output. Table 9 provides the
numerical results of the simulations. Cross layer implementation
improves the PDR for both FTP and CBR. It can be remarkably
observed that end to end delay is much less after cross layer opti-
mization when considering node speeds. This enhancement
includes reducing the delay for both FTP and CBR.
Fig. 6. Flowchart of Simulation Process.
Fig. 7. Sample MANET simulation environment using QualNet.
N. Hasan, A. Mishra and Arun Kumar Ray Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal 35 (2022) 101099Presentation of the numerical data in Table 9 is given in Figs. 12
and 13. The figures show the effect of our proposed FLS-CL opti-
mization on MANET performance concerning PDR and end to end
(E2E) delay. Fig. 12 provides the PDR with respect to node speed.
FLS-CL deployment has enhanced the PDR of both FTP and CBR
when increasing the node speed. This is a result of cross layer pro-
viding a degree of balance between the values of the TCP/IP stack
parameters targeting keeping the PDR at high level. For FTP traffic,
FLS-CL implementation has improved PDR of an average of 4.37 %.
For CBR, FLS-CL optimization increased the PDR by 6.8 % on an
average. The overall all performance of the network has enhanced
after our proposed FLS-CL.
Fig. 13 shows cross layer optimization in End-to-End delay with
respect to varying node speed. FLS-CL optimization decreased the
end to end delay for both types of applications. For FTP traffic,10end to end delay decreased after cross layer implementation by
91.89 % overall. While for CBR, cross layer implementation has
decreased the overall end to end delay by 80.69 %.
5.3. Scenario-3: MANET with varying AMC Data-rate
Simulation Results: The obtained results for PDR, and end to
end delay were compared with the values obtained when inferring
fuzzy sets and applying cross layer output. Table 10 provides the
numerical results of the simulations. Cross layer implementation
improves the PDR for both FTP and CBR. It can be remarkably
observed that end to end delay decreased after cross layer opti-
mization with respect to data rates. This enhancement includes
reducing the delay for both FTP and CBR. The enhancements in
PDR and delay values for both applications are summarized at
the end of this discussion. Representation of the data provided in
Table 10 is given in Figs. 14 and 15.
From Fig. 14 it is evident that, FLS-CL based cross layer opti-
mization enhanced the PDR for both FTP and CBR when increasing
the data rates. For FTP traffic, FLS-CL implementation improved the
average PDR by 2.05 %. However, the improvement is more in-case
of CBR traffic, FLS-CL implementation increased the PDR by 73.04 %
overall.
Fig. 15 shows cross layer optimization effect on end to end
delay with respect to the data rates. FLS-CL based Cross layer opti-
mization decreased the end to end delay in both FTP as well as CBR
traffic. For FTP traffic, average end to end delay decreased after
cross layer implementation by 35.67 %. For CBR, cross layer imple-
mentation has decreased the average end to end delay by 34.59 %.
5.4. Scenario-4: MANET with varying number of re-transmissions
Simulation Results: The obtained results for PDR, and end to
end delay were compared with their values without cross layer
implementation. Table 11 provides the numerical results of the
simulations. Cross layer implementation improves the PDR for
both FTP and CBR. End to end delay was decreased after cross layer
implementation.
Fig. 16 shows that PDR increases with increasing the number of
retransmissions. Proposed FLS-CL based Cross layer implementa-
tion enhanced the PDR for both FTP and CBR when increasing the
number of retransmissions. For FTP traffic, FLS-CL implementation
improved the PDR by an average of 3.6 %. For CBR traffic, FLS-CL
implementation increased the PDR by an average of 12.98 %.
Fig. 8. 3-D plot of (a) No. of retransmissions (b) AMC (c) Transmission Power (d) Application rate (e) Hop count.
N. Hasan, A. Mishra and Arun Kumar Ray Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal 35 (2022) 101099Fig. 17 shows our proposed FLS-CL based cross layer optimization effect on end to end delay with respect to the number of
retransmissions. End to end delay decreased with increasing the
number of transmissions. Cross layer optimization decreased the
end to end delay. For FTP traffic, the average end to end delay
has decreased after FLS-CL cross layer implementation by
58.49 %. For CBR traffic, FLS-CL implementation has decreased
the average end to end delay by 89.55 %.115.5. Result Summary: QoS performance improvements with proposed
FLS-CL design for MANET
Here we are summarizing our results for four scenarios for both
connection-less User Datagram Protocol (UDP) based CBR traffic as
well as connection-oriented Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)
based FTP application traffic. The result shows that CBR is getting
more QoS performance boost as compared to TCP. Table 12 shows
the Result summary of cross layer optimization on Packet Delivery
Ratio (PDR) and End-to-End (E2E) delay.
Fig. 9. Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) for different Network Size.
Fig. 10. Throughput for different Network Size.
Fig. 11. End-to-End Delay for different Network Size.
N. Hasan, A. Mishra and Arun Kumar Ray Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal 35 (2022) 101099
126. Discussion
We summarized that, our results are quite promising after
implementation of proposed FLS-CL based cross layer design for
all the four scenario of network deployment. This proves the effec-
tiveness of Fuzzy-Logic based soft-computing technique for opti-
mization of overall network performance by enhancing the QoS
parameters. The most important outcome of this research work
is to validate the proposed FLS-CL design for four different scenar-
ios by taking key- network configurations as variables and validat-
ing the impact of our proposed novel FLS-CL design.
In a nutshell, our proposed FLS-CL has performed better for
connection-less User Datagram Protocol (UDP) based Constant
bit rate (CBR) traffic than the connection-oriented counterpart
i.e. Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) with the File Transfer
Protocol (FTP) as the test application protocol. In case of CBR
traffic over UDP results show an improvement of 27.64 % in
PDR on an average for all four scenarios and reduced the average
Fig. 12. Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) for different Node Speed.
Fig. 13. End-to-End (E2E) Delay for different Node Speed.
Fig. 14. Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR) for varying AMC Data rate.
Fig. 15. End-to-End (E2E) Delay for varying AMC Data rate.
N. Hasan, A. Mishra and Arun Kumar Ray Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal 35 (2022) 101099E2E delay by 76.04 % considering all four scenarios. However, in
case of FTP over TCP there is an average improvement of PDR by133.28 % and a reduction of average E2E delay of 58.81 % consid-
ering all four scenarios.
N. Hasan, A. Mishra and Arun Kumar Ray Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal 35 (2022) 101099End (E2E) delay in all the possible deployment scenarios. This
comes from flexibility that FLS-CL provides to cope the mobility
and the increase in network size. It performs that through utilizing
the optimal values of the selected parameters.
This comes from flexibility by following:141) Adjusting the ratio of the application from application layer
2) Improving network performance by reducing the end to end
delay in the network
3) Managing energy consumption in the communication pro-
cess between the nodes
4) Controlling the number of hops in the network between
source destination pairs
5) Adjusting the data rates in the first layer
6) Controlling the number of retransmissions in the MAC layer.
Most importantly the result obtained here would be helpful in
design and deployment of real-world MANETs with cross-layer
design approach to enhanced QoS performance keeping in mind
the strict QoS parametric requirements of any IoT applications
which has Ad-hoc network requirements specifically designed for
creating Mobile Ad-hoc communication framework support for
Next-generation Cyber Physical System [47].7. Conclusion
Cross-layer is the transparent layer that use the parameters
across more than one layer (or several/multiple layers as per sce-
nario specific network requirements) of the TCP/IP stack. Fuzzy
logic approach is a part of soft computing that interacts with the
imprecision and approximate reasoning. FLS adjusts the parame-
ters of TCP/IP due to adaptive nature of MANET. The results
N. Hasan, A. Mishra and Arun Kumar Ray Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal 35 (2022) 101099demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed FLS-CL design in
improving the network performance compared with the constant
parameters (deterministic model) of the network configurations.
Most importantly the result obtained here will be helpful in design
and deployment of real-world MANETs with cross-layer design
approach specifically designed for creating Mobile Ad-hoc commu-
nication framework support for Next-generation Cyber Physical
System. This work can be extended by considering more complex
and dynamic network configurations as well as parameters and
even multi-objective functions based constrained optimization
problem can be formulated and scope of various promising opti-
mization techniques like Nature Inspired algorithms / evolutionary
algorithms-based techniques can be explored for Cross-layer
design for MANET in the context of providing mobile ad-hoc com-
munication framework for future IoT-applications and Next-
generation Cyber Physical Systems.Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to influence the work reported in this paper.Acknowledgments
Authors do not have any funding agency to disclose. However,
this research work has been carried out in Wireless Communica-
tion and Networking Laboratory, School of Electronics Engineering,
Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology (KIIT), Deemed to be
University, Bhubaneswar, India. The academic & research license
used for QualNet Simulator 5.2 and MATLAB is part of KIIT labo-
ratory facility and this research work is supported by KIIT DU.