Lightweight structure of transportation vehicles is an effective
way to achieve energy conservation and emission reduction.
To this end, lightweight materials like Al alloys and Mg alloys
have been used more and more in automobile industry. This
has inevitably led to challenges in joining Al alloys and Mg
alloys, and dissimilar welding is able to employ the).
by Elsevier B.V. This is
).advantages of both materials simultaneously [1]. Friction stir
welding (FSW), as a solid-state process, is especially suitable
for joining dissimilar Al/Mg alloys. It can avoid defects caused
by melting/solidification in fusion welding and produce very
low residual stress and distortion [2e4].
During the FSW process with intense plastic deformation
and frictional heating, dynamic recrystallization (DRX) can
occur in three types: continuous dynamic recrystallizationan, discontinuous dynamic recrystallization (DDRX) and
geometric dynamic recrystallization (GDRX) [5e7]. DRX during
FSW has an important effect on the grain microstructure
refinement in the weld nugget zone (WNZ). For FSW of the
samemetal (Al alloy or Mg alloy), the resultant grain structure
in the weld is usually the main factor affecting the joint
strength. For dissimilar FSW of Al/Mg alloys, the joint strength
primarily depends on metallurgical bonding by formation of
intermetallic compounds (IMCs) and mechanical interlocking
due to the tortuous bonding interface [1,2,8,9]. The amount
and thickness of brittle IMCs have to be controlled within
appropriate ranges [10]. On the other hand, the microstruc-
tures in dissimilar welds are still critical to determine the joint
quality, and the abnormal grain structure will also severely
affect the properties of the joints. At the same time, the
corrosion resistance of the joints is dependent on the grain
microstructure in WNZ [11,12]. Therefore, the evolution of
grain structures in dissimilar welds should be deeply investi-
gated. However, previous studies only focused on the micro-
structure evolution of the same metal FSW welds [5e8]. For
dissimilar FSW of Al/Mg alloys, the different thermodynamic
properties of twomaterials and the IMCs formation will result
in different characteristics of grain structures.
Recently, in order to suppress the generation of IMCs and
alleviate the influence of some inherent problems in FSW on
joint strength [13], some modified FSW process have been
proposed, such as under liquid nitrogen or underwater FSW
[14,15]; water cooling assisted FSW [16]; heat assisted FSW
[17]; and hybrid laser friction stir welding [18]. Nonetheless,
suchmodifications increased the operation difficulty and cost,
which hinders their application in practice. Since ultrasonic
vibration (UV), as a kind of mechanical energy, can lower the
yield strength of materials during plastic deformation, UV has
been applied to assist FSW of Al/Mg alloys [19e21]. As for the
exertion mode of UV, Benfer et al. [19] applied UV on one base
material via a roller, while Ji et al. [20] and Liu et al. [21] placed
an ultrasonic generator toward the bottom of Mg plates. The
authors’ group developed a different system, which applies
UV directly on the top surface of basematerials and in front of
the tool, namely the ultrasonic vibration enhanced friction stir
welding (UVeFSW) [10,22]. Our previous studies have shown
that the ultrasonic field cannot only promote the mixing of Al
and Mg materials, but also inhibit the growth of IMCs, so as to
significantly improve the joint strength in Al/Mg dissimilar
FSW [10,23e25]. However, the underlying mechanism of
UVeFSW in dissimilar Al/Mg alloys and its influence on the
microstructure evolution have not been elucidated.
In this work, the FSW and UVeFSW butt welding of dis-
similar Al/Mg alloys were carried out, and the grain structuresTable 1 e Nominal composition and mechanical properties of
Alloy Nominal chemical compositio
Si Fe Cu Mn Mg
6061-T6 0.51 0.20 0.30 0.009 1.09
AZ31BeH24 0.016 0.001 0.003 0.44 Bal.
(Note: the suppliers of 6061-T6 and AZ31BeH24 were Jinan Zhixin Alum
Products Co., Ltd. (Luoyang, China), respectively.).in different regions of the welds under different welding
conditions were characterized. The grain size, misorientation
angle distributions and textures on both sides of bonding
interface were compared. The DRX mechanisms at different
locations in WNZ were analyzed, and the influence of UV on
the grain structure evolution in dissimilar FSW of Al/Mg alloys
were discussed.2. Experimental
6061-T6 Al alloy and AZ31BeH24 Mg alloy plates with a
thickness of 3 mm were butt welded. Their chemical compo-
sition and mechanical properties are listed in Table 1. Fig. 1
shows the experimental set-up. The ultrasonic vibration was
directly acted on the workpieces in front of the tool via the
sonotrode with an angle of 40 relative to the workpiece sur-
face and a distance of 20 mm away from the tool axis. In this
experiment, the UV frequency was 20 kHz, and the output
power was about 220 W. Conventional FSW and UVeFSW ex-
periments were made to compare the difference of micro-
structure evolution in dissimilar Al/Mg alloys WNZs.
According to the experimental optimization results, the
test conditions were as follows: the tool rotating speed was
800 rpm, the welding speeds ranged from 30 to 80 mm/min,
the tilt angle of the tool was 2.5, and the plunge depth of the
shoulder was 0.15 mm. Mg alloy plates were placed on the
advancing side (AS) while Al plates were on the retreating side
(RS), and the pinwas offset to theMg alloy side by 0.3mm. The
tool used, made of H13 tool steel, consisted of a concave
shoulder with a diameter 12 mm and a cone-shaped pin with
right-hand thread. The tip and root diameters of pin were 3.2
and 4.2 mm, respectively, and the length was 2.75 mm. For
description convenience, C is used to represent the conven-
tional FSW tests, while U is used to represent the UVeFSW
tests, that is, C-800-30 means the conventional FSW test with
process parameters 800 rpm-30 mm/min, while U-800-50
means the UVeFSW test with process parameters 800 rpm-
50 mm/min.
After welding, the metallographic samples were cut by
electric spark wire cutting machine. Then, samples were
grounded and polished with different sets of emery papers up
to 1000 grit and followed by 0.5 mm diamond slurry. For elec-
tron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) characterization, the ion
beam slope cutter (Leica EM TIC 3  ) was used to remove the
surface stress of the samples. The field emission scanning
election microscope (FE-SEM) (Zeiss Gemini 500) was used to
collect the grain microstructure information in the weld. In
the process of EBSD characterization, the scanning step sizebase material.
n (wt. %) Mechanical properties
Cr Ti Zn Al UTS (MPa) EL (%)
0.13 e 0.05 Bal. 294 10
e e 1.10 3.05 260 12
inum Industry Co., Ltd (Jinan, China) and Luoyang Shengte Metal
Fig. 1 e Schematic of the FSW and UVeFSW of dissimilar Al/Mg alloys.
was 0.1 mm for the regions in WNZ and 0.3 mm for the thermal
mechanical affected zone (TMAZ).
For macrostructure observation, the Al alloy side was
etched firstly by Keller reagent (1 ml HF þ 1.5 ml HCl þ 2.5 ml
HNO3 þ 95ml H2O) for 5 s. Then, the Mg alloy side were etched
by picric acid solution (4.2 g picric acidþ 70ml ethanolþ 10ml
acetic acidþ 10ml H2O) for 10 s. Themacrographs of thewelds
were taken by Zeiss Daheng Invasion USB cameramicroscope.3. Results and discussion
3.1. Microstructure of base materials
Fig. 2 shows the microstructure of base materials (6061-T6 Al
alloy and AZ31BeH24 Mg alloy). The grains in Al alloy are long
strips, as shown in Fig. 2a, and the average grain size is
~32.8 mm. The grain boundary information is shown in Fig. 2b,
where the green boundaries represent low angle grain
boundaries (LAGBs) and the black boundaries represents high
angle grain boundaries (HAGBs). Most of the grain boundaries
in Al base material are HAGBs, and the proportion of LAGBs is
only 3.9%. Moreover, it can be seen from the misorientation
angle distributions (Fig. 2c) that the grain orientation is close
to random distribution. This illustrates that the grains in Al
base material did not have preferred orientation during
growth, which can also be found from the pole figures of Al
base material (Fig. 3a), with no obvious texture formed.
As shown in Fig. 2d, the Mg alloy base material contains
both coarse grains (up to about 65 mm) and very fine grains
(about 1 mm), which is the typical structure of hot-rolled Mg
alloy [26], and the average grain size is ~5 mm. Moreover,
different from the Al basematerial, Mg basematerial contains
a large number of LAGBs (Fig. 2e), and its proportion is 47.6%.
At the same time, there are some twin grains in Mg base
material, and a peak value at about 86 inmisorientation angle
distributions histogram (Fig. 2f), indicating that these twingrains are {101-2}<1-011> tensile twins. In addition, according
to the pole figures (Fig. 3b), it can be determined that there is
no obvious special texture in Mg base material, only the
deflected {0001} basal texture, and the maximum texture in-
tensity is 11.36 multiple of random density (MRD).
3.2. Bonding interface morphology
Fig. 4 shows the macrograph of the welds at transverse cross-
section in FSW and UVeFSW. Different from the case of same
material FSW, there is an obvious bonding interface in the
WNZ of dissimilar Al/Mg alloys. The tortuous interface in-
dicates that the Al and Mg strips interpenetrated with each
other in WNZ, and formed mechanical interlocking struc-
tures. It can be found that when UV was applied, the length of
bonding interface increased, that is, the degree of mutual
mixing of materials increased. This is related to the acoustic
softening effect of UV, which reduces the material flow stress
and promotes the material flow in the WNZ [10].
At the same time, the metallurgical bonding was achieved
by formation of the IMCs along the bonding interface. There-
fore, the existence of Al/Mg bonding interface has an impor-
tant impact on the joint strength. In this study, the
observation of grain structure in the WNZ was mainly carried
out along this interface. As schematically illustrated in Fig. 4g,
the small red and yellow squares near the bonding interface
indicate the EBSD observation positions on the Al side and the
Mg side, respectively.
3.3. Grain structure at mid-depth locations under
different welding speeds
3.3.1. Grain microstructure at A3 in the WNZ of the Al side
Firstly, the grains at the WNZ in the Al side, i.e., location A3 in
Fig. 4g, was characterized by EBSD. Fig. 5 shows the obtained
grain microstructure morphology at A3 in FSW and UVeFSW
under three levels of welding speed. In Fig. 5, the black grain
Fig. 2 e IPF maps, GB maps and misorientation angle distributions of base materials (a, b, c): Al alloy; (d, e, f): Mg alloy.
boundaries were the HAGBs, the silver gray grain boundaries
were the LAGBs, and the division value between themwas 15.
Regardless of FSW or UVeFSW, fine grains were formed in the
WNZ on the Al side.When the welding speedwas 30mm/min,
the grains had an obvious inclined downward deformation
orientation, as shown by the black dotted line in Fig. 5a and b.
Since the pin used in this study was cone-shaped with right-
hand thread, the counterclockwise rotation of the pin during
welding was conducive to promoting the downward flow of
material [27], so that the grains had an inclined downward
deformation orientation. When UV was applied in UVeFSW,
such inclination angle was decreased, which may be due to
the fact that UV field can effectively enhance thematerial flow
in horizontal direction [21]. However, there was no inclined
downward deformation orientation under other two welding
speeds (50 and 80 mm/min), which may be because the ma-
terial cannot flow downward effectively at the higher welding
speed. The more specific reason requires a further detailed
exploration of the material flow in Al/Mg dissimilar FSW.
The fine grains in the WNZ of the Al side were obviously
produced by DRX. It can be found that the boundaries of most
grains were composed of some LAGBs and some HAGBs, such
as the grains in the white circles in Fig. 5, which is a typicalfeature of CDRX [28]. In addition, it can also be observed that
some elongated grains were decomposed into several sub-
grains, which formed a LAGB with little difference in grain
orientation, as shown by the black arrows in Fig. 5. This il-
lustrates that GDRX also played a certain role [29], but CDRX
should be the dominant mechanism of grain DRX.
According to statistics of grain size in Fig. 5, for FSW with
welding speed of 30, 50 and 80mm/min, the average grain size
in Al sideWNZ was 0.92 ± 0.21; 1.18 ± 0.24; and 0.86 ± 0.24 mm,
respectively. In UVeFSW, the corresponding average grain size
was 0.79 ± 0.18; 0.98 ± 0.22 and 0.96 ± 0.26 mm, respectively. It
can be found that after application of UV field, the grain size
was refined at the welding speed of 30 and 50 mm/min, but it
coarsened a little bit at the welding speed of 80 mm/min.
However, the change of grains size with and without appli-
cation of UV is small. This is because the thermo-mechanical
action in FSW already refines the grains in WNZ to a consid-
erable degree. The exerted UV, which just plays an auxiliary
role, can only cause the change of grains size to a certain
extent. It should be noted that the grain size in theWNZ of the
Al side was very small (about 1 mm) in both cases of dissimilar
FSWandUVeFSW.Usually, in FSWof the sameAl alloys (6061-
T6) under the same rotation speed and higher welding speed,
Fig. 3 e Pole figures of base materials. (a) Al alloy, (b) Mg alloy.
the minimum average grain size in the WNZ was greater than
2 mm [30]. This is because the temperature inWNZ during FSW
of Al alloy is usually higher than that during dissimilar FSW of
Al/Mg alloys [2].
In addition, the average grain size increased first and then
decreasedwith the increase of welding speed in both FSW and
UVeFSW, although the grain size difference between 50 andFig. 4 e The weld morphology in FSW (a, c, e) and UVeFSW (b, d
bonding interface (g).80 mm/min cases was very small in UVeFSW. Generally, the
lower the welding speed is, the higher the welding heat input
is, and the easier for grain to grow. The reason for this is that
the recrystallized grain size in the WNZ is not only dependent
on the temperature, but also dependent on the strain rate of
material deformation. The specific relationship can be
expressed by following equations [31e33]., f), and schematic of EBSD data acquisition locations near
Fig. 5 e IPF maps of grain microstructures at location A3 (the WNZ in the Al side) in FSW and UVeFSW under different weld
speeds.
where dWNZ is the grain size in WNZ, dBM is the grain size in
base materials, Z is the Zener-Holloman parameter, _ε is the
strain rate, Q is the lattice diffusion activation energy, R is themolar gas constant, T is the temperature in WNZ, Rm is the
average material flow rate (about half the rotation speed), re is
the effective radius of dynamic recrystallization region, Le is
the effective depth of dynamic recrystallization region, Tm is
themelting point of basematerials,u is the rotation speed, v is
the welding speed, K and a are constants.
Based on Eqs. (1)e(4), the higher the temperature, the larger
the grain size in the WNZ, while the larger the strain rate, the
smaller the grain size. Therefore, when the welding speed
increased, on one hand, the decreasing of temperature
reduced the grain size, but on the other hand, the decrease of
strain rate increased the grain size. Under the complex action
of these two effects, the grain size did not change monoto-
nously with the increase of welding speed. With applied UV
Fig. 6 e Grain microstructure information at location A3 (the WNZ in the Al side) in FSW and UVeFSW. (a) Misorientation
angle distribution, (b) LAGBs fraction, (c) Comparison of recrystallization degree.
field, the acoustic softening effect can significantly reduce the
deformation stress of the material, so as to promote the ma-
terial deformation [34,35] and increase the strain rate
[10,22,23]. Moreover, the UV field has little effect on the
welding temperature [10]. Thus, theoretically, the grain size
will be reduced after applying UV, which is also validated by
above-mentioned test results. As for the increase of average
grain size at welding speed of 80 mm/min, it will be discussed
in detail in Section 4.
Fig. 6 shows the misorientation angle distribution, LAGBs
fraction and recrystallization degree at location A3 in the
WNZ of the Al side. It can be found that after the application
of UV, LAGBs fraction decreased, and the recrystallization
degree of grains increased, which indicates that more LAGBs
were transformed into HAGBs in UVeFSW. Hu et al. [29] also
found that the UV field can promote the recrystallization
behavior of grains in FSW of same 2219 Al alloy, which is
consistent with the results of dissimilar UVeFSW in this
study. In contrast, in C-800-80, although the recrystallization
degree of the grains was low, there were a large amount of
extremely fine grains (as shown by the white arrows in
Fig. 5e), which reduced the average grain size. When the
welding speed was 30 and 50 mm/min, the grain morphology
well conformed to the law that the LAGBs fraction decreases,the recrystallization degree increases, and the grain size is
refined. In addition, with the increase of welding speed, the
recrystallization degree decreased gradually, which is mainly
because the dislocation motion rate decreased with the
decrease of welding heat input, which affected the dynamic
recrystallization process.
3.3.2. Grain microstructure at B3 in the WNZ of the Mg side
The grain microstructure at location B3 in the WNZ of the Mg
side is shown in Fig. 7. Different from the Al alloy side, no
obvious deformation orientation of grains was found in the
WNZ atwelding speed of 30mm/min,whichmay be due to the
different recrystallization processes of Al alloy andMg alloy. It
was observed that most grain boundaries in the WNZ of the
Mg side were also composed of some HAGBs and some LAGBs,
as shown in the white circles marked in Fig. 7, indicating that
CDRX had occurred. At the same time, some grain boundaries
expanded outward and formed new grains at the grain
boundary, as shown by the black arrows in Fig. 7, which ac-
cords with the typical characteristics of DDRX [36]. Therefore,
the recrystallization mechanism in the WNZ of the Mg side
includes CDRX and DDRX, which is consistent with the
recrystallization mechanism in FSW of similar Mg alloys
[36,37].
Fig. 7 e IPF maps of grain microstructures at location B3 (the WNZ in the Mg side) in FSW and UVeFSW under different weld
speeds.
In FSW, when the welding speed was 50 and 80 mm/min,
most grains in the WNZ of the Mg side had obvious <0001>
orientation. But in UVeFSW, this phenomenon only appeared
in theweldmadewithwelding speed 50mm/min. Thismay be
due to the change in the degree of grains recrystallization and
thematerial flow after the application of UV field. According to
statistics of grain size in Fig. 7, the average grain size at
location B3 was 1.68 ± 0.26; 2.57 ± 0.43 and 2.38 ± 0.36 mm in
FSW under weld speed of 30, 50 and 80 mm/min, respectively.
With applied UV, the average grain size at location B3 was
0.93 ± 0.19; 2.32 ± 0.44 and 2.02 ± 0.41 mm in UVeFSW,
respectively. With the increase of welding speed, the grain
size in the WNZ of the Mg side first increased and then
decreased, similar to the case on the Al side. This indicatesthat in the same weld, although the materials are different at
two sides, the variation law of grain size affected by temper-
ature and strain rate is the same. But the grain size at B3 (the
WNZ in the Mg side) was generally larger than that at A3 (the
WNZ in the Al side). This is not only related to the different
stacking fault energy of Al and Mg materials, but also related
to the original grain size of two base materials [28,38]. How-
ever, compared with the cases of same Mg alloy FSW or dis-
similar Mg alloy FSW [36,38], the grain size in the WNZ of the
Mg side is much smaller in dissimilar FSW of Al/Mg alloys.
This is also due to the relatively low welding temperature in
dissimilar FSW of Al/Mg alloys [2].
When the welding speed was 30 mm/min, the grain size in
the WNZ of the Mg side changed greatly before and after the
Fig. 8 e Grain microstructure information at location B3 (the WNZ in the Mg side) in FSW and UVeFSW. (a) Misorientation
angle distribution, (b) LAGBs fraction, (c) Comparison of recrystallization degree.
application of UV, from 1.68 mm reduced to 0.93 mm.Moreover,
it can be found from Fig. 8a and b that the LAGBs fraction
decreased greatly with UV field. At the same time, the
recrystallization process was greatly improved (Fig. 8c).
However, such a significant UV effect was not found in other
two cases (50 and 80mm/min). FSW is a complex process with
coupled thermal-mechanical-material flow behaviors, and
the influence mechanism of UV field on the multi-field phys-
ical coupling needs to be further studied.
Some twin grainswere found in case C-800-50, as shown by
the white arrow in Fig. 7c. And it can also be seen from Fig. 8a
that the misorientation angle has an obvious peak at about
86. Similar phenomenon was also observed in FSW of Mg
alloys by other scholars [36,39], and explained that this should
be related to the transformation of twin boundary into HAGBs
during large strain deformation. However, no twins were
found in the weld of U-800-50. When the welding speed was
80 mm/min, the misorientation angle was mainly distributed
in the range of 10e30. With applied UV field, the misorien-
tation angle was widely distributed in the range of 2e93. This
also occurred at the case of welding speed 30 mm/min. Mir-
onov et al. [36] pointed out that when themisorientation angle
was widely distributed between 15 and 93, DDRX occurred.
Therefore, in the FSW cases of C-800-30 and C-800-80, thedominant recrystallization mechanism was CDRX, while in
UVeFSW that was DDRX. In the CDRX process, a large amount
of LAGBs are generated, and then these LAGBs gradually
transform to HAGBs. However, in DDRX process, it does not
need to produce a large amount of LAGBs to complete the
recrystallization process. In addition, the higher degree of
recrystallization means that more LAGBs have been trans-
formed to HAGBs. That is why the LAGBs fraction decreases
significantly when UV was applied at welding speed 30 mm/
min.
Similarly, the dominant recrystallization mechanism of
grains was CDRX in both C-800-50 and U-800-50. However, the
twin recrystallization mechanisms also appeared in C-800-50.
This illustrates that UV has an important effect on the
recrystallization process of grains in the WNZ of the Mg side.
Meanwhile, Fig. 8c shows that under the welding speed of 30
and 80 mm/min, the application of UV significantly improved
the recrystallization degree of grains. In addition, it is worth
noting that for both FSW and UVeFSW, there was a peak in the
misorientation angle at about 30. This is because the
maximum rotation angle of grain orientation around the c-
axis will not exceed 30 whenMg alloy grains recrystallize and
grow, since Mg has hexagonal close-packed crystal structure
[36,40,41].
Fig. 9 e IPF maps of grain microstructures at locations A1-A4 (the WNZ in the Al side) in FSW and UVeFSW (welding speed
50 mm/min).
03.4. Variation of grain microstructure along weld depth
direction
Since the shoulder has a big diameter than the pin, the ma-
terial in the WNZ at different depths experiences different
thermo-mechanical actions during the FSW process [42]. This
uneven distribution of temperature and strain/strain rate
along the thickness direction has an important impact on the
microstructures of the weld [43]. Therefore, four different
depth positions (A1-A4 and B1eB4 in Fig. 4g) were selected
along the Al/Mg bonding interface to observe the grain
microstructure.
3.4.1. Grain microstructure at A1-A4
In Al alloy side, the EBSD scanning positions were A1-A4 as
shown in Fig. 4g. Fig. 9 presents the grain microstructures at
four locations A1-A4 in FSW and UVeFSW welds made at
welding speed of 50 mm/min (the joint was with the highest
strength at thiswelding speed [23]). Since locationA1was only
0.5 mm below the top surface of the weld, the material here
underwent severe plastic deformation due to the influence of
the shoulder, and the grains were pulled into stripes with
obvious deformation orientation in the horizontal direction,
as shown by the white dotted line in Fig. 9a and e. Location A2
was a little far away from the shoulder, and was less affected
by the shoulder, so that the grains here were only slightly
elongated (Fig. 9b and f). The grains in regions A3 and A4,
mainly affected by the pin, experienced relatively lower strain
and strain rate, so that they were composed of equiaxed
grains. However, the grains at region A4 had an obvious in-
clined downward deformation band (as shown by the white
dotted lines in Fig. 9d and h), which was related to the localmaterial flow. Only in term of grainmorphology, there was no
obvious difference in FSW and UVeFSW. In addition, due to
the influence of shoulder, the recrystallization process of
grains in region A1was greatly affected by strain. As shown by
the black arrows in Fig. 9, many elongated grains were
decomposed into several sub-grains with the same orienta-
tion, which shows that GDRX played an important role in re-
gion A1. However, this phenomenon was less obvious in
regions A2-A4 where CDRX became the major recrystalliza-
tion mechanism of grains.
According to statistics of grain size in Fig. 9, for FSW
sample, the average grain size in regions A1-A4 was
0.67 ± 0.18; 0.91 ± 0.26; 1.18 ± 0.24 and 0.93 ± 0.25 mm,
respectively. In UVeFSW, the average grain size was
0.62 ± 0.16; 0.96 ± 0.23; 0.98 ± 0.22 and 0.96 ± 0.23 mm,
respectively. In both FSW and UVeFSW welds, the average
grain size increased first and then decreasedwith the increase
of the distance from the top surface of the weld, although the
grain size difference is small. The minimum grain size
appeared at the position close to the shoulder (region A1),
while the maximum grain size occurred at the mid-depth of
the weld (region A3). In addition, it is worth noting that there
was almost no difference in the average grain size at locations
A2, A3 and A4 in UVeFSW, but a significant size difference
existed there in FSW. This should be due to the UV field
induced variation of thermal-mechanical process in WNZ.
When the UV field was applied, the average grain size at lo-
cations A1 and A3 decreased and increased at locations A2
and A4, but the difference in grain size was very small in FSW
andUVeFSWof dissimilar Al/Mg alloys. Hu et al. [44] found the
grain size in the WNZ of 2219-T6 Al alloy FSW increased after
the application of UV field. Gao et al. [45] and Padhy et al. [30]
Fig. 10 e Grain microstructure information at locations A1-A4 in FSW and UVeFSW. (a) Misorientation angle distribution, (b)
LAGBs fraction, (c) Comparison of recrystallization degree.
found that the grain size in the WNZ of 2024-T3 or 6061-T6 Al
alloy FSW was refined after applying UV. Therefore, the UV
effect on the grain microstructure evolution is more compli-
cated in dissimilar FSW, and further study needs to bemade in
this aspect.
Fig. 10 shows the misorientation angle distribution, LAGBs
fractionandrecrystallizationdegreeof grains in regionsA1-A4.
It is worth noting that the LAGBs fraction in regions A1-A4
increasedfirst and thendecreased (Fig. 10b), and theminimum
valuewas foundat regionA1,but the recrystallizationdegreeof
grains at region A1 was not the largest, which was slightly
lower than that in region A2 (Fig. 10c). This should be due to
different mechanisms of grain recrystallization. In region A1,
the grains were greatly affected by the strain in shoulder
affected zone, GDRX was the main recrystallization mecha-
nism, while other regions were less affected by shoulder, and
CDRX was the main recrystallization mechanism. Therefore,
the grains in region A1 did not need to gradually transform
from LAGBs to HAGBs during the recrystallization process.
Moreover, the misorientation angle in region A1 was mainly
distributed in the high angle range (Fig. 10a). With application
of UV field, although there was no obvious difference in the
recrystallization mechanism and the misorientation angledistribution in regions A1-A4, the degree of recrystallization
has been improved to varying degrees (Fig. 10c).
3.4.2. Grain microstructures at B1eB4
Fig. 11 shows the grain microstructures at different depth
positions (B1eB4 in Fig. 4g) in the WNZ of the Mg side. In re-
gion B1, the grains have obvious <0001> orientation, while for
other locations, except region B4 in UVeFSW, most grains
were close to <0001> orientation. This phenomenon is related
to the fact that the material flow during welding is mainly
affected by the shear force of the pin [38]. For the region B4 in
UVeFSW, it is at the bottom of the WNZ. Generally, the Al/Mg
material will be violently mixed here under the influence of
the tip end of the pin [9,23,44]. Therefore, the flow of the
material is more complex, and the grain orientation is no
longer simply affected by the shear force of the pin. In addi-
tion, the grains in region B1 were equiaxed, which was
different from that of Al alloy side where grains were elon-
gated under the influence of shoulder. This should be due to
the different stacking fault energy of Al and Mg, resulting in
different recrystallization processes.
According to statistics of grain size in Fig. 11, the average
grain size of regions B1eB4 in FSWwas 1.41 ± 0.23; 1.64 ± 0.35;
Fig. 11 e IPFmapsofgrainmicrostructuresatB1eB4 (theWNZintheMgside) inFSWandUVeFSW(weldingspeed50mm/min).
22.57 ± 0.43 and 1.88 ± 0.31 mm, respectively. In UVeFSW, the
average grain size at B1eB4 was 1.08 ± 0.22; 1.66 ± 0.38;
2.32 ± 0.44 and 0.92 ± 0.37 mm, respectively. The grain size in
theMg alloy side was larger than that in the Al alloy side.With
the increase of the distance from the top surface of the weld,
the average grain size in regions B1eB4 first increased and
then decreased, and the maximum grain size was at the mid-
depth of the weld (B3), like the case at the Al alloy side. With
application of UV, the grain size in regions B1, B3 and B4
decreased, and only the grain size in region B2 increased
slightly. And except for region B4, the differences in other
regions are also very small like that in the Al alloy side.
Different from the Al alloy side, the smallest grain size at
theMg alloy side in UVeFSWdid not appear in region B1, but in
region B4. This was because region B4 contains fine grain area.
As shown in Fig. 11h, it can be divided into coarse grain area
and fine grain area according to grain size, and its boundary
was roughly defined by the black dotted line. After statistics,
the average grain size of coarse grain area and fine grain area
was ~1.41 mm and ~0.82 mm, respectively. This demonstrates
that the material here underwent ununiform plastic defor-
mation. Region B4 locates in the severe mixing zone, so that
the grain evolution at different points of this region is
different. In this study, the EBSD scanning region was deter-
mined just according to the distance from the bottom of the
weld. This also be the reason why the grain microstructure is
so different between CeB4 and UeB4. Therefore, further
experimental research is needed to understand the evolution
process of grains in different locations at the bottom of the
weld.
Fig. 12 shows the microstructure information of the grains
at locations B1eB4 in FSW and UVeFSW. For regions B1eB3 inboth FSW and UVeFSW, the misorientation angle was mainly
distributed at 2-30, and there were peaks at about 2 and 30.
But the grain misorientation angle in region B4 was widely
distributed at 2-90, and there was a peak only at about 30.
The reason for this difference may be that the dominant
recrystallization mechanism is different [36], that is, the
dominant mechanism in region B1eB3 is CDRX, while in re-
gion B4 it is DDRX. Therewas also an obvious peak at about 86
in region B3 in FSW. This is because twin grains appeared at
region B3 in FSW, as shown by the white arrow in Fig. 11c.
There was no obvious difference between FSW and UVeFSW
in the misorientation angle distribution in other regions.
According to statistics, the LAGBs fraction in region B4 was
the lowest, which was 11.7% in FSW and 8.1% in UVeFSW
(Fig. 12b). On one hand, this is due to the high degree of
recrystallization in this region (Fig. 12c), on the other hand,
DDRX does not produce a large amount of LAGBs. The regions
B1eB3 contained a large amount of LAGBs. The LAGBs in re-
gion B1 was the largest in FSW, while in UVeFSW the LAGBs in
region B2 was the largest. Moreover, with application of UV
field, the LAGBs in region B2 increased, but the recrystalliza-
tion degree of grains in each region was improved to varying
degrees. This is because that UV not only promotes the grain
recrystallization process, but also affects the grain recrystal-
lization mechanism. That is, the area fraction of grains with
CDRX or DDRX changes. It can be concluded that although the
grains in the Mg alloy side and the Al alloy side experienced
almost similar thermalemechanical processes during the
welding, there were different evolution regularities of grain
microstructures at both sides along the weld depth direction
due to the different stacking fault energy and initial grain size
of base materials.
Fig. 12 e Grain microstructure information in B1eB4 of FSW and UVeFSW, (a) Misorientation angle distribution, (b) LAGBs
fraction, (c) Comparison of recrystallization degree.
j o u r n a l o f ma t e r i a l s r e s e a r c h and t e c hno l o g y 2 0 2 2 ; 1 7 : 1e2 1 133.5. Grain microstructure in the TMAZ
To better understand the ultrasonic influence on the changes
of grain structures in different regions of the weld, the grains
in thermal mechanical affected zone (TMAZ) were character-
ized and analyzed.
Fig. 13 shows the grain microstructure information at
locationA5 (Fig. 4g) in theTMAZof theAl alloy side. It shouldbe
noted thatbecauseUVcausedexpansionof theWNZvolume in
UVeFSW [10,23,44], the selected checking point A5 in UVeFSW
was a little bit farther from the weld centerline than that in
FSW, as indicated in Fig. 4g. There were large grains and fine
grains at location A5 in the TMAZ of the Al alloy side, and the
fine grains were mainly distributed at boundaries of large
grains, formed a typical necklace structure (Fig. 13a and c).
Fromthegrainboundaries images (Fig. 13band f), it canbe seen
that a large amount of LAGBs were formed in the TMAZ of the
Al alloy side. Its proportion in FSWandUVeFSWwas 72.7%and
68.4%, respectively. In the welding process, although the ma-
terial here did not directly contact with the tool, plastic defor-
mation still occurred under the driving of the material flow in
the stirred zone, resulted in a lot of dislocations generated in
grains. And these dislocations formed LAGBs through aggre-
gation and rearrangement. Simultaneously, dislocationswould accumulate here first because of the high distortion
energy at the original grain boundaries.
Fig. 13d and h are KAM (kernel average misorientation)
images, which were plotted with the average value of the
orientation deviation between each pixel and the nearest
pixel. It can be used to qualitatively indicate the uniformity of
the plastic deformation of thematerial, and indirectly indicate
the dislocation density of the material [46]. The higher KAM
value indicates that it has larger strain and higher dislocation
density. In Fig. 13d and h, the grain boundaries have higher
KAM values, indicating the accumulated dislocations here.
Under continuous action of deformation and heat, the LAGBs
can transform to the HAGBs by absorbing and consuming
dislocations, thereby formed new grains on original grain
boundaries. This is a typical CDRX process, and this process
would significantly reduce the dislocation density. As shown
in Fig. 13, the grains in the area marked by the black circles or
ellipses had completed recrystallization process, and thus had
a lower dislocation density. When the UV field was applied,
although there was not much difference in the morphology of
the grain structures here, the degree of recrystallization was
improved.
Fig. 14 shows the grain microstructure information at
location B5 (Fig. 4g) in the TMAZ of the Mg alloy side. The
Fig. 13 e IPF maps (a,e), GB maps (b,f), grain morphology maps (c,g) and KAM maps (d,h) at A5 in Al side TMAZ (50 mm/min).
(a, b, c, d): FSW; (e, f, g, h): UVeFSW.
Fig. 14 e IPF maps (a,e), GB maps (b,f), grain morphology maps (c,g), KAM maps (d,h), misorientation angle distribution (i)
and calculated grain size (j) at B5 in Mg side TMAZ (50 mm/min). (a, b, c, d): FSW; (e, f, g, h): UVeFSW.
j o u r n a l o f ma t e r i a l s r e s e a r c h and t e c hno l o g y 2 0 2 2 ; 1 7 : 1e2 114
Fig. 15 e {101} and {111} pole figures at location A3 (the WNZ in the Al side) under different weld speeds. SPN-shear plane
normal, SD-shear direction.
Fig. 16 e The standard {111} pole figure of FCCmetals under
simple shear. SPN-shear plane normal, SD-shear direction.
j o u r n a l o f ma t e r i a l s r e s e a r c h and t e c hno l o g y 2 0 2 2 ; 1 7 : 1e2 1 15difference from the Al side was that the grain size here was
relatively uniform. Meanwhile, Fig. 14c and g demonstrate
that the grains in the TMAZ of the Mg alloy side have higher
degree of recrystallization than that in Al side. There may be
two reasons for this difference. First, in this study, Mg alloy
was placed on the AS, so that it experienced more severe
plastic deformation. Second, the Al alloy and Mg alloy have
different stacking fault energy and deformability, so that the
conditions for occurring recrystallization were different.
According to statistics of grain size in Fig. 14, the average
grain size at the TMAZ of the Mg alloy side in FSW and
UVeFSW was 3.34 ± 0.52 and 2.51 ± 0.42 mm, respectively.
Obviously, the grains were refined when the UV was applied,
which should be due to the recrystallization process promoted
by UV field. In addition, themisorientation angle in FSWhad a
higher peak value at low angles (2-5), and had a wide distri-
bution in the range of 20e90, as shown in Fig. 14i. In UVeFSW,
the grain misorientation angle was mainly distributed in the
range of 2e30, and had an obvious peak at about 30. Mg base
material contains large grains and small grains. These small
grains would not undergo recrystallization under insufficient
heat, so that some small grains may retained in the FSW.
However, when the UV field was applied, the deformation
degree of material increased, and the recrystallization degree
increased, so that the original grains were replaced by
recrystallized ones. Therefore, the misorientation angle dis-
tribution in FSW and UVeFSW was different.3.6. Texture evolution
3.6.1. Al alloy side
During the welding process, the Al alloy material will arise
preferred orientation during the grain growth process due to
Fig. 17 e {101} and {111} pole figures at locations A1-A4 (the WNZ in the Al side, 50 mm/min).
j o u r n a l o f ma t e r i a l s r e s e a r c h and t e c hno l o g y 2 0 2 2 ; 1 7 : 1e2 116the shearing and extrusion of the pin, and then form textures
in WNZ. Fig. 15 shows the pole figures at location A3 in the
WNZ of the Al side at different welding speeds after proper
deflection. By compared with the {111} standard pole figure in
the simple shear deformation of face-centered cubic metal
(Fig. 16) [39], it can found that the texture component in C-800-
30 was mainly C{001}<110> shear texture, while the texture
component in U-800-30wasmainly A*
1/ A
*
2 {111}<112> andA/ A
{111}<110> shear texture.When the welding speedwas 50 and
80 mm/min, the main texture components in FSW and
UVeFSW were same. At 50 mm/min, it is mainly composed of
C{001}<110> component, and at 80 mm/min, it was mainly
composed of A*
1/ A
*
2 {111}<112> and A/ A {111}<110> compo-
nents. For different welding speeds, the texture component
produced in the weld was different. In addition, when the
welding speedwas 30mm/min, themaximum intensity of the
texture was reduced with the application of UV field, from
5.37 MRD (multiple of random density) to 3.80 MRD. This may
be related to the appearance of different shear textures.
However, when thewelding speedwas 50 and 80mm/min, themaximum intensity was increased, because the UV enhanced
the material deformation in the WNZ.
Fig. 17 shows the {110} and {111} pole figures at locations A1-
A4 at Al side WNZ (welding speed 50 mm/min), and for the
convenience to make comparison, they were also properly
deflected. In FSW, the main texture components in locations
A1, A2, and A4 were A*
1/ A
*
2 and A/ A, and in location A3 was C
component. In UVeFSW, the textures in location A1 was A*
1/ A
*
2
and C components, in location A2 was B/ B components, in
location A3 was C component, and in region A4 was A*
1/ A*
2
components. Except for the location A4, the texture intensity of
other locations increased slightly when UV field was applied.
It is worth noting that the B/ B and C components are
common textures in FSW of similar Al alloy [47,48]. But in this
study, the B/ B component only appeared in location A2 in
UVeFSW, and there were also fewer locations where C texture
appeared. The texture components A*
1, A
*
2, A and A usually
occur in the deformation process with lower strain, while the
B/ B and C components appear with higher strain deformation. And the appearance of B/ B texture requires the
material to experience greater strain than C texture [47].
Therefore, from the texture components it was found that the
degree of material deformation in Al/Mg dissimilar FSW is
relatively low. However, the WNZ in UVeFSW contains more
B/ B and C shear textures, which indicates that the strain of
the material in WNZ was increased when the UV was applied.
This proves that the UV can promote the plastic deformation
and material flow in the WNZ in terms of texture evolution.
3.6.2. Mg alloy side
Fig. 18 shows the {0001} and {11-20} pole figures at location B3
in the WNZ of the Mg alloy side at different welding speeds. It
can be found that the {0001} base texturewasmainly produced
in theWNZ of theMg alloy side. This is the same as the texture
component commonly found in FSW of same Mg alloy [37,39].
In FSW, the grains deformation is mainly driven by the
shear action of the pin, and the direction of the shear force is
the tangent direction of the pin surface. Thus, the grain c-axis
in the central area of the WNZ is generally parallel to the
welding direction (WD) [38]. However, in this study, the c-axis
of grains was deviated. There are two reasons for this phe-
nomenon. First, in this study, although the EBSD scanning
area was located 1.5 mm from the bottom of the weld (the
mid-depth), it would be slightly biased to the Al side orMg side
because the Al/Mg bonding interface was tortuous and irreg-
ular. Second, the pin used in this study was cone-shaped, sothat the normal direction of shear force at theweld center was
not parallel to WD. However, when the welding speed was
30 mm/min, the grain c-axis deflected to ND in both FSW and
UVeFSW. Considering the obvious downward trend of mate-
rial flow at 30 mm/min (Fig. 5a and b), the deflection of the c-
axis here may be caused by the downward flow of the mate-
rial. In addition, the texture intensity was significantly
reduced when UV field was applied at welding speed of 30 and
80 mm/min. This is because more complete recrystallization
behavior of Mg alloy grains occurred in UVeFSW, which
weakened the orientation of grains.
The {0001} and {11-20} pole figures at different depth posi-
tions in the WNZ of the Mg alloy side are shown in Fig. 19.
Although the locations in the weld were different, the {0001}
base texture all formed. Firstly, in locations B1eB3, regardless
of FSW or UVeFSW, the grain c-axis was approximately par-
allel to WD, which was the result of the shear force effect of
the pin duringmaterial deformation [38]. However, in location
B4, not only the grain c-axis deflected greatly, but also the
texture intensity decreased significantly. As mentioned
earlier, the materials at B4 located in the severe deformation
zone, and the material flow in this zone is not simply hori-
zontal or vertical but like swirl [9,23,44], so that the preferred
orientation during grain growth was also changed. Mean-
while, the higher degree of recrystallization in this location
(Fig. 12c) would weaken the preferred orientation of grain
growth. In addition, Mironov et al. [36] pointed out that a
strong basal texture would be formed when the grain
misorientation angle was almost not distributed between 30
and 85. The misorientation angle distribution (Figs. 8 and 12)
and the pole figures (Figs. 18 and 19) in this study are consis-
tent with the result in [36].
3.7. Role of UV field
Based on the grain microstructure at different locations under
different welding speeds, a common characteristic was found.
That is, regardless of how the grain size changed with and
without application of UV, the degree of grains recrystallization
was always improved. During the welding process, the Al/Mg
material flows from the front to the back of the pin under the
shearing and squeezing action of the tool, and finally deposits
behind the tool and fills the gap left by the pin. During this high
temperature and high strain process, the grains undergo dy-
namic recrystallization behavior. Although the grain micro-
structure in Al and Mg side weld has different recrystallization
processes, they all depend on the motion of dislocations andthe migration or slippage of grain boundaries. It is well known
that UV can promote themotion of dislocations inmetal plastic
processing [35,44,49,50]. Essentially, friction stir welding is also
a metal plastic deformation process. Thereby, the UV in FSW
can promote the motion of dislocations, and then promote the
entanglement, aggregation, rearrangement of dislocations and
the dipole annihilation. As shown in Fig. 20, during the dynamic
recrystallization process, due to the influence of the UV, the
motion and rearrangement of dislocations are accelerated.
These continuously accumulating dislocations promote the
formation of LAGBs, and at the same time, the transformation
of LAGBs into HAGBs by absorbing dislocations is also acceler-
ated. Thus, the degree of recrystallization of grains is increased.
In this process, dislocations are also consumed in large
quantities.
In general, the higher the degree of recrystallization, the
smaller the grain size. This is also the reason why the average
grain size decreased when UV field was applied in most sub-
regions of WNZ. However, the role of UV in promoting dislo-
cation motion and grain boundary transformation shortened
the incubation period of recrystallized grain nucleation,which
made the recrystallized grains enter the growth stage earlier.
Meanwhile, UV can also promote grain boundary slip/migra-
tion. The applied UV can also promote generating a large
number of vacancies by reducing the vacancy formation en-
ergy [44]. These vacancies are easy to deposit at the grain
boundary under the lowest energy criterion, which can not
only promote the motion of dislocations at the grain bound-
ary, but also promote the self-diffusion of the grain boundary
[51]. Thus, grain boundary slip or migration are also indirectly
promoted. This causes the recrystallized grains nucleate
earlier and grow faster in UVeFSW, leading to an increase in
the average grain size in some locations. A typical example
was in Al side WNZ of C-800-80, as shown in Fig. 5e and f.
Although the recrystallization degree of grains in conven-
tional FSW was low, it contained a large number of fine
recrystallized grains that had not yet grown, so that the
average grain size was smaller than that in UVeFSW. In
addition, the acoustic softening effect of UV can promote the
material flow in the WNZ, which also has a certain impact on
the recrystallization mechanism of grains.4. Conclusions
(1) In dissimilar FSW of Al/Mg alloys, the recrystallization
mechanisms of WNZ grains at Al alloy side are CDRX
and GDRX, while at Mg alloy side, that are CDRX and
DDRX. In both sides, CDRX plays a leading role.
Compared with the cases in FSW of same alloys, finer
grains structures were obtained in dissimilar FSW of Al/
Mg alloys due to a little bit lower welding temperature.
(2) Ultrasonic vibration has little influence on the recrys-
tallization mechanism of grains at Al alloy side, but hasgreat effect on the grains structure in the Mg alloy side.
Especially when the welding speed was 30 and 80 mm/
min, the exerted ultrasonic vibration changed the main
recrystallization mechanism of grains in the Mg alloy
side, that is, from CDRX to DDRX.
(3) Although there are different grain evolution processes
at Al alloy and Mg alloy sides, their average grain sizes
in WNZ increased first and then decreased with
increasing of welding speed. The average grain sizes in
the WNZ also increased first and then decreased along
the thickness direction, and the maximum grain size
was at the mid-depth of the weld.
(4) For joining of dissimilar Al/Mg alloys, low strain shear
texture appeared more in the WNZ of the Al side, such
as A*
1, A*
2, A and A components in FSW, while in
UVeFSW, more regions in the WNZ were with high
strain shear textures C and B/ B, because the acoustic
softening effect of ultrasonic field promoted the mate-
rial deformation. In the WNZ of the Mg side, only {0001}
basal texture appeared in both FSW and UVeFSW.
(5) Ultrasonic vibration can promote the motion, aggrega-
tion and annihilation of dislocations in stirred zone,
which is the key factor affecting the thermal-
mechanical behavior in the welding process. Thus, the
evolution of grain microstructure in the weld was var-
ied, and the recrystallization degree of grains was
improved in UVeFSW.Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing
financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
j o u r n a l o f ma t e r i a l s r e s e a r c h and t e c hno l o g y 2 0 2 2 ; 1 7 : 1e2 120Acknowledgement
The authors appreciate the financial support to this work from
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No.
52035005).