Microcellular Injection Molding (MIM) is a variant of injection molding technology used to manufacture
plastic components, with a cellular structure and reduced weight. However, this technology is charac-
terized for producing components with a poor surface finish and impacted structural integrity. To
improve the molded surface appearance, the MIM process conditions have been thoroughly studied,
nevertheless, some marks are often noticeable. For this reason, the combination of MIM with decorative
technologies enables components with high surface finish, as well as, decorative and functional prop-
erties, among other benefits. Since the development of the technology surface improvement has been the
focus of many research articles and recently, supported by the progress in machinery, technology inte-
gration has emerged as a solution. This review aims to expose the main advantages, disadvantages, and
methods for surface improvement of MIM molded components. The key modifications and requirements
for the tooling system as the supercritical fluid unit, the fuse, and mold modifications are discussed. The
advantages of integration of these different processes with MIM technology are further described and a
review of the progress so far is addressed as well as the incorporation of numerical simulation for the
MIM components production. For that, technology integration of two-shot injection molding (2 K Shot),
In-Mold Decoration (IMD), In-Mold Labeling (IML), and In-Mold Electronics (IME), which represent the
biggest integration potential with MIM are examined.
© 2021 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This
is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/
4.0/).1. Introduction
Injection molding technology is widely used to produce poly-
meric material components with complex geometry in an auto-
mated process, to achieve high throughput rates required for large-
scale productions, and for a vast range of products. The variables of
the process are diverse and need to be closely monitored to ensure
proper component production [1,2]. The rapidly growing demand
for lightweight molded components and reduced material con-
sumption have enabled the development of new manufacturing
processes. Microcellular Injection Molding (MIM) is a type of in-
jection molding where molded components are produced with ard of International Journal of
y Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Cocellular structure, providing a weight reduction, and a shorter cycle
time when compared with conventional injection molding (CIM)
[3,4]. Despite its many advantages, MIM components are known for
their poor surface finish, exhibiting swirl and silver marks on the
molded surface. To improve the molded surface appearance, MIM
technology has been thoroughly studied by the optimization of the
process conditions [5e8], enforcement of the process with the
resort of Rapid Heat and Cycle Molding (RHCM) system [5,9], gas
counter-pressure [10], core-back [11,12], and co-injection molding,
with a formation of a solid shell by CIM and a foamed core [10,13].
However, the complete removal of themarks is not successful. With
the emerging of a new and wide range of technologies, such as In-
Mold Decoration (IMD), In-Mold Labeling (IML), and In-Mold
Electronics (IME), focused on the decoration and functionalization
of components surface, the surface finish of MIM molded compo-
nents ceases to be a problem. The blend of features from each of
these technologies may produce better outcomes. In this paper, ammunications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
D. Dias, C. Peixoto, R. Marques et al. International Journal of Lightweight Materials and Manufacture 5 (2022) 137e152literature review was employed to summarize the existing studies
for the integration of MIM technology with different processes,
highlighting the advantages and the potential of the integration of
different processes with MIM technology for a high surface
appearance.2. Microcellular Injection Molding
Microcellular Injection Molding (MIM) is a less widespread
technology, having recently emerged as an alternative to conven-
tional methods, supported by the lightweight trend, in order to
reduce the consumption of raw material needed to produce a
finished component [14e16]. With this type of injection molding
technology, the molded components are produced with a cellular
structure, typically the cells have micro dimensions, 1e100 mm, and
a density of 107e1015 cell/cm3, providing weight reduction (5%e
30%) driven by the hollow core of comprising cells [8,17,18]. The
typical cellular structure resulting from MIM technology can be
obtained by the introduction of blowing agents in the melted
polymer during the injection molding process, creating a one-
phase solution during plasticization [19,20], through controlled
conditions of pressure and temperature [21]. The introduction of
the blowing agent supports the formation of a cellular structure
that expands during the filling, packing, and cooling phase,
resulting in parts with decreased warpage, making a 1:1 wall-to-rib
ratio feasible, increasing the freedom of design [22,23]. With MIM
technology, the packing phase can almost be eliminated as the cell
expansion process provides a fully packed part with reduced
warpage, and decreased residual stress, ensuring dimensional ac-
curacy [9,24]. The resulting molded component is the holder of a
high strength-to-weight ratio, high energy absorption, and excel-
lent heat and acoustic insulation [10,25]. MIM requires a faster
filling stage, when compared with CIM, to initiate cell nucleation,
promoted by the high pressure drop, the moment the melt passes
through the gate into the cavity. This, combined with a smaller
packing phase leads to a significant reduction in the cycle time,
saving up to 15%e40% of the time spent to produce a conventional
molded component, depending on the material and designed
product [26]. Fig.1, presents themain differences between the cycle
stages of CIM and MIM.2.1. Blowing agents
The blowing agents used in the process can be either physical
(PBA e Physical Blowing Agent), such as Nitrogen (N2) and Carbon
Dioxide (CO2) [27,28], or chemical (CBAe Chemical Blowing Agent),Fig. 1. Comparison between a C
138inorganic or organic components such as Calcium Carbonate
(CaCO3) and Talc [29e31]. The PBA variant is a cleaner technology
that guarantees a more uniform and denser cell structure with
smaller dimensions, for that reason it is usually used in applications
where a uniform cell structure is required in order to somewhat
maintain the mechanical properties throughout the molded
component [4,32]. The addition of a PBA is accomplished by
injecting gas in its supercritical fluid (SCF) phase through a dedi-
cated SCF injector. In this phase the gas is in a liquid-like state,
obtained by maintaining the PBA above a critical pressure (Pcr) and
temperature (Tcr), allowing the gas to quickly diffuse into the
polymer melt, creating a single-phase inside the barrel. After the
material passes through the injection system, the pressure drops
rapidly, causing high thermodynamic instability, leading to the
precipitation of the gas phase out of the polymer, initiating the cell
expansion. The high pressure and temperature, characteristic of the
injection molding process guarantee that the PBA maintains its SCF
phase until the material is injected into the cavity [33]. In Fig. 2 is
depicted the foaming process, described above.
The introduction of a cell expansion agent results in injected
components with surface defects such as silver streaks and swirls.
These defects are caused by the contact of the mixture polymer/
gas with the cold mold wall, in the moment of contact, the poly-
mer starts to freeze, and the cells rupture, dragging across the
mold wall and resulting in the aspect associated with MIM, as
illustrated in Fig. 3.2.2. Microcellular Injection Molding unit and tool requirements
In MIM, the mold tool and the molding unit need to undergo
some modifications, specific to the technology, diverging from CIM
in the cost and complexity depending on the blowing agent (CBA or
PBA).2.2.1. Physical blowing agent MIM variant
The physical variant of MIM requires the setup of an injection
molding unit with an external PBA storage container. Additionally, a
control unit is necessary to timely regulate the amount of PBA
introduced in the barrel, under pressure, guaranteeing that the gas
is at its SCF phase to properly mix with the polymer melt. In PBA
technology, when MuCell® (the most commonly used MIM tech-
nology, owned by Trexel Inc.) is employed, a special fuse is required
to ensure proper mixing. As depicted in Fig. 2, the fuse is composed
of an end region that possesses a characteristic geometry to pro-
mote dynamic mixing, assuring the creation of the one phase so-
lution. As such, modifications are made to the end screw section orIM cycle and a MIM cycle.
Fig. 2. Physical microcellular foaming mechanism and its stages along the injection molding process.
Fig. 3. Flow-induced marks formation scheme (a), molded component representation
of silver streaks (b), adapted with the permission of [34].
D. Dias, C. Peixoto, R. Marques et al. International Journal of Lightweight Materials and Manufacture 5 (2022) 137e152to the nozzle section by attaching rhombus, Z-mixers, or even static
mixers [24]. Due to this increment the MuCell® screw is longer
than the commonly used in the conventional injection molding,
region 3 of Fig. 2. Recently, Trexel Inc. Introduced a new commercial
screw Tip Dosing Module, which increased the performance with
lower implementation cost. This solution optimized the mixing
module, with reduced space requirements, and is compatible with
standard three-zone screws. Alternative processes to MuCell® have
emerged, for instance, Yusa et al. [35] developed a MIM technology
using non-SCF physical blowing agents through the incorporation
of PBA directly from gas cylinders into the molten polymer through
an injection valve and vent hole, however, more studies are
required before this methodology may be implemented
industrially.
2.2.2. Chemical blowing agent MIM variant
The chemical variant of MIM does not require modifications to
the injection unit, needing only a shut-off-nozzle [36]. The foaming
mechanism is promoted by the reaction of the CBA in the polymer
melt, due to the high temperature. Some CBA are exothermic which
can potentiate an early blowing of the cells, reducing residence
times for the material, consequently, the cell structure is not139uniform in most cases [37]. The CBA reactions may also result in
byproducts, such as water, which can lead to additional degrada-
tion of the polymer matrix [38], and subsequent reduction of me-
chanical properties, also the subproduct can damage the molding
cavity [32,39]. The molding cavity and the screw can also suffer
from this reaction and be damaged prematurely, which can influ-
ence their durability [32,39,40]. This phenomenon can be avoided
by the use of PBA, although, requires more capital investment,
however, in the long run, PBA will become advantageous when
compared with CBA [40]. In Table 1, is presented a summary com-
parison of the two MIM variants.
For both variants of MIM, a shut-off-nozzle should be consid-
ered to prevent early blowing and the return of the material into
the barrel, Fig. 4 [41].
2.2.3. Mold modifications
Concerning the mold modifications, there is a lack of studies
that reference the required modifications, and the main referenced
alteration is the use core-back technique, which consists of the
movement of the mold wall after the cavity is fully filled. The mold
movement is applied to promote uniform nucleation and cell
growth through the component to be molded. This technique is
usually applied to parts that require a higher degree of structural
integrity, and cell uniformity is of the most importance [42,43]. The
modifications required for the application of core-back require a
unique mold design that must be able to retract in a precise way to
ensure that the pressure loss caused by the increase of space inside
the cavity is equally distributed and consequently boost cell
nucleation and growth [11,12]. Although advantageous, this tech-
nique requires the additional module that will increase the cost of
the overall technology and since many of the developed compo-
nents with the technology do not require high structural integrity,
this technology is often not considered.
2.3. Surface improvement
Although aesthetically poor, MIM may assure the elimination of
sink marks, still, it is crucial that the part presents an impeccable
surface finish when needed. In order to reduce the effect that the
creation of the cellular structure has in the produced part, several
parameters of the injection molding process must be closely
monitored and optimized, for instance, the filling stage should
comprise an injection speed profile with a slow speed in its first
stages, and a full speed for the remaining injection time to prevent
Table 1
Comparison of the process and cost: physical and chemical MIM, information
gathered from Refs. [32e40].
Physically MIM Chemical MIM
Initial Cost (equipment) High Low
Cost of blowing agent Low Medium
Tool complexity Low Medium
Machinery complexity High Low
Changes in CIM process Needs a
different
injection unit
and peripheral
equipment
The same injection
unit can be used
Durability High Medium; Release of
byproduct that can
damage molding cavity
Cost-benefits In long term is
more beneficial
e
D. Dias, C. Peixoto, R. Marques et al. International Journal of Lightweight Materials and Manufacture 5 (2022) 137e152an overgrown structure in the flow front [27]. Due to challenges
inherent to the technology, different solutions have been proposed
in the attempt to minimize or even eliminate aesthetical defects on
the molded part surface. Gas counter-pressure is one of the tech-
niques most used due to its simplicity and capability to achieve
good surface results. The technique consists of filling the molding
cavity with a gas, increasing the pressure in the flow front, cir-
cumscribing the growth of the nucleated cells until the cavity is
fully filled. Only then the pressure inside the cavity is reduced and
the cells begin to grow, in this stage, the frozen layer is almost fully
formed, and the migration of cells to the surface is avoided,
resulting in a more uniform surface finish with improved rugosity
[44]. Another commonMIM variation to diminish surface defects is
the mold opening technology, which is applied by completely
filling the cavity with polymer melt, ensuring higher melt pressure,
and delaying the cell growth while the polymer melt in contact
with the mold wall freezes, preventing defects caused by the cells.
Then the mold retracts and the cellular growth starts, guaranteeing
a smother surface and balanced cell structure [16]. In Fig. 5 a) is
presented the surface of a MIM produced part at different distances
from the gate. It can be clearly observed surface defects on the
molded component, with increasing surface rugosity in the furthest
region from the gate, due to the free cell formation in the flow front.
In Fig. 4 b) is presented the same part processed with the moldFig. 4. Physical MIM Injecti
140opening MIM technology, with lower rugosity when compared
with MIM, as expected.
The RHCM system, also known as Variotherm is also frequently
applied to enhance the surface finish, resulting in a molded
component with high gloss and with minimized surface defects,
such as swirls or silver streaks and weld lines [5]. In this process,
the mold and cavity are heated to high temperatures during the
filling and packing phase and rapidly cooled during the cooling
phase, as presented in Fig. 6.
Dong et al. [45] studied the influence of the RHCM on the surface
of the injected MIM parts by using a dynamic mold temperature
control system where the temperature was elevated during filling
and quickly reduced. In Fig. 6 is presented the result obtained in the
study, and as it can be observed there is a significant reduction in
surface rugosity was achieved with the increase of mold temper-
ature from 30 C to 140 C. Even when the mold temperature is
increased to 60 C, the surface appearance is improved, resulting in
parts with a better appearance, as can be seen in Fig. 7.
Additionally, Dong et al. [45] give and plausible explanation to
this phenomenon stating that due to the high mold temperatures
the cells do not immediately freeze and the continuous flow of the
melt removes the surface marks. This process results in the
continuous reduction of space inside the molding cavity, increasing
pressure and temperature leading to the redissolution of the gas
into the melt, granting a smoother surface, as seen in Fig. 8.
When confronting the study developed by Dong et al. [45] with
Hou et al. [16] it may be observed that surface finish may be
improved either by RHCM or by mold opening technique. However,
it is noticeable the lower overall surface rugosity achieved by the
RHCMmethod, which is coherent with whatwas expected from the
technology, since the mold high temperature allows polymer chain
mobility, while in the mold opening technique, the material in
contact with mold wall forms a frozen layer, constraining the
polymer chains mobility, causing the characteristic surface defects
of MIM produced component without RHCM.
As already mentioned, core-back technology has also been
applied to MIM to promote uniform nucleation by maintaining the
mold cavity smaller during the filling phase, as a result, the cell
growth is delayed. When the cavity has fully filled the cavity
slightly retracts, decreasing the pressure inside the cavity and
promoting uniform nucleation and cell growth [42,46]. The tech-
nology has also been called High-Pressure Foam Injection Moldingon unit setup example.
Fig. 5. Surface finish of a MIM molded component a) conventional MIM, b) mold-opening MIM, reprinted with the permission of [16].
Fig. 6. RCHM cycle representation during MIM.
D. Dias, C. Peixoto, R. Marques et al. International Journal of Lightweight Materials and Manufacture 5 (2022) 137e152(HPFIM) [47] since the pressure is maintained inside the cavity
during the filling stage. The high pressure and sequential pressure
drop can be favorable to a uniform cell structure formation and,
usually, is applied for that purpose but, recently, the HPFIM has141been applied without the cavity retracting stage, resulting in fully
packed parts without a visible cellular structure. The use of this
variant resulted in the production of polylactic acid (PLA) glasses
fully transparent [48]. The combination of the different
Fig. 7. Surface rugosity analysis for a molded MIM part with different mold temperatures, reprinted with permission from Ref. [45]. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society.
Fig. 8. Proposed explanation for surface cell marks solved with RHCM system: (a) originally generated surface bubble marks, (b) island protuberances, and (c) original surface
bubble marks are eliminated. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [45]. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society.
D. Dias, C. Peixoto, R. Marques et al. International Journal of Lightweight Materials and Manufacture 5 (2022) 137e152technologies reviewed above has promoted good results in the
molded components produced by MIM. However, even with an
improved surface finish, the MIM parts are not aesthetically com-
parable to conventional injected parts and can be aesthetically
unattractive to the consumer. To overcome this problem, the
combination of different molding and decorative technologies with142MIM will improve the molded component value, with an aesthet-
ically pleasing surface. Therefore, considering the integration of
different technologies is a solution to produce high-end products
with additional functionality, while reducing the weight of the
products and the environmental impact by using less raw material
in the process.
D. Dias, C. Peixoto, R. Marques et al. International Journal of Lightweight Materials and Manufacture 5 (2022) 137e1522.4. Commercial microcellular injection molding techniques
Similar MIM techniques are commercially available. In most
cases, the use of PBA is preferred due to its stability during the
injection process when compared to CBA, as a result of CBA
exothermic or endothermic properties [24,49]. The most common
technologies using PBA are MuCell® [50], OptiFoam [51], and
ErgoCell [49]. The application of these technologies demands an
additional gas injection unit, which is connected to the plasticizing
unit. In addition, as already mentioned, the technologies require
the use of an optimized screw to ensure proper gas-polymer
mixture [27]. Amongst the presented technologies, MuCell® is by
far themost known and used due to its long presence in themarket.
Trexel Inc., the owner of MuCell® technology, has patented the
process in 1984 after being developed in MIT e Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. Similar technologies to MuCell® have
emerged in the market, such as Ergocell but, eventually, Trexel
proclaimed patent rights to the technology, which demanded that
when an Ergocell machine was sold it should comprise MuCell®
licensing. Later on, the Demag Ergocell retracted their position in
the market [27]. As already mentioned IQ Foam® [4], a serious
contender to MuCell®, dismisses the need for gas injection into the
barrel, injecting the PBA directly in the hopper. Table 2 summarizes
the commercial MIM technologies, their present status, and the
main advantages/disadvantages.
2.5. Limitations of MIM
Like most technologies, MIM has its limitations, the most
commonly linked to the above mentioned, poor superficial finish-
ing [7,13], plus the technology result in parts with a lower me-
chanical strength of the injected part [27,56], when compared withTable 2
Main MIM techniques and commercial products.
Commercial
Name
Owner Main Features
PBA MuCell® Trexel Inc. Biggest technology in the market
Weight reduction up to 30%.
Ergocell Sumitomo Demag PBA injected through an additional
nozzle located between the
plasticization cylinder and injection
nozzle.
OptiFoam Sulzer Chemtech Ltd The PBA is introduced in the nozzle
through a centered torpedo. The
injection and mixing unit is fitted
between the needle shutoff nozzle
and the plasticization unit.
ProFoam IKV Aachen Adds PBA into themixture to plastic
pellets before melting; System
installed in the hopper of the
injection molding machine.
IQFoam ® Volkswagen Contains two gas injector units and
a two-chambered unit assembled
between the hopper and the barrel
where the solid pellets are
impregnated with gas; The foaming
can be controlled only by the gas
pressure, being easily automated.
CBA TecoCell® Trexel Inc. Uses nano-sized CaCO3 particles to
produce high density foams with
microcellular structure.
EcoCell® Polyfil Corp Uses nano-sized CaCO3 particles to
produce high density foams with
microcellular structure.
143a CIM part. The surface defects, appear during the filling stage and
are generally characterized by swirl marks, caused by the trapped
gas on the part surface [57], and silver streaks (flow-induced marks
resulting from the shear of microcells when in contact with the
cavity wall, freezing immediately) [28,58]. The variation of the
mechanical properties is appointed as a consequence of the cellular
structure that comprises the molded component with hollow
cavities, resulting in the decline of the flexural modulus and tensile
strength of the produced part [59]. However, in some cases, this
reduction can be negligible as Guo et al. [60] have reported. The
team was able to produce injected components with only a small
decrease in mechanical property, with a reduction of only 0.9% in
tensile strength when compared with the CIM process, having re-
ported the same scale of results for impact resistance and flexural
strength tests. Nevertheless, in most cases, it is reported a decrease
in mechanical strength that can be detrimental to the molded part
[61,62], depending on the final application. For that reason, the cost
savings and the material reduction cannot be the key parameters
used to select the technology. In fact, the final application of the
molded component must be the main factor to determine whether
the product may be designed and produced byMIM technology. An
example of some technologies that can be employed with MIM are
In-Mold Labeling (IML), In-Mold Decoration (IMD), In-Mold Elec-
tronics (IME), and over-molding or 2 K shot molding. These tech-
nologies will be described below, and their integration with MIM
technologies will be address in the following topics.
3. In-Mold Labeling (IML), In-Mold Decoration (IMD), and In-
Mold Electronics (IME)
The IML and IMD technologies, also known as film-insert
molding (FIM), are techniques that enable the decoration of aStatus Advantages/Disadvantages Ref.
Commercially available The process depends on
temperature and pressure;
Needs a specific screw geometry;
May require a secondary non-
return valve geometry.
[50,52]
Requires a MuCell® license
to be used
Achieves different degrees of
foaming due to an independent
piston pump speed, not linked to
the screw movement; Requires a
great equipment investment.
[40,52,53]
Dropped due to patenting
issues
Similar to MuCell®, can achieve
homogeneous mixing in the
plasticizing phase.
[40,52]
No longer available Limited solubility due to the
introduction of PBA in the solid
state of pellets.
[3,52]
Commercially available Reduced cost when compared to
similar technologies; Its design
reduces losses of gas during
injection.
[4]
Commercially available Cleaner, more environmentally
friendly method when compared to
other CBA methods.
[54]
Commercially available Similar to TecoCell® but for
extrusion purposes.
[55]
Fig. 10. Two-Component injection molding exemplification.1st with MIM and 2nd by
CIM.
D. Dias, C. Peixoto, R. Marques et al. International Journal of Lightweight Materials and Manufacture 5 (2022) 137e152molded component during the injection molding process [63,64].
Even though the IML and IMD are often used as synonyms in
literature, the main difference between the two is appointed to the
end application of the product. For products with shorter lifespans
as are packaging for cosmetics and food containers, IML is most
used as labels with the goal to enhance the aesthetic appearance of
the products, while informing the consumer [64,65]. On the other
hand, IMD is used for high-end products, such as toys, appliances,
and automotive components [66,67] where better finishing is
needed. In some cases, the geometry of the molded component can
demand a pre-process where the film is conformed to precisely fit
the molded component [68]. The process is carried out by ther-
moforming of the film, and in these situations, the producer must
ensure that the electronic components can meet the formability of
the material and resist two different thermal processes. The
inserted film may require a pre-processing by thermoforming to
ensure proper alignment with the component to be molded, as-
suring a strong bond between the two parts of the molded
component (film þ injected part) [69,70].
IME is considered a variant of the film-insert molding, IMD,
combined with printed electronics [71], in which the film inserted
in the mold is incorporated with electronic components, such as
conductive inks [72] surface mount devices (SMDs), or LED's,
resulting in a functional high-end product [73,74]. This technique
enables a one-step production process by eliminating post-
processing necessities [72,75]. However, the fragile constitution
of such materials implies a thorough study to determine the proper
allocation of the electronic components in the molded part. While
being over-molded, the electronic components can degrade or
dislocate due to high temperatures and pressure exerted on the
film. The working principle of the technologies is very similar,
differing in the end application and the components presented on
the films. In IML, IMD, and IME, a film is inserted in the mold with
precise dimensions, adjusted to the component to be produced, the
process starts with the introduction of pre-cut film in an opened
mold, by a robotic arm, aligned with the injection molding cycle
[69,76], Fig. 9. The fixation of the film in the mold is then accom-
plished by vacuum, electrostatic fields, ormechanical pins placed in
the mold cavity [77]. Most commonly, vacuum or electrostatic
fields are used to avoid any damage or visible mark in the moldedFig. 9. FIM ma
144part as a result of the mechanical pins [76]. IMD and IME products,
require durability, hence, the films are thicker and consequently are
less suitable for thermoforming, resulting in stretch marks. As a
result, the technique is usually associatedwith shallower and not so
complex parts [78].
The technologies presented above, have the advantage of
masking any marks present on the surface of the molded compo-
nent, however, improper preparation of this process may result in
defects, such as creases or folds [78], cracked inks [24], and wash-
out [79]. Another crucial factor with the techniques lies in the
compatibility between the film and the resin to ensure proper
bonding between the two different materials [80e82].4. Two-shot injection molding (2 K)
Two-shot injection molding (2 K shot), is a variant of multi-
component molding (MCM) [83]. With this technique it is
possible to inject two different materials, or the samematerial with
different colors, resulting in products with great bonding proper-
ties [84,85]. As the terminology indicates, this injection process is
composed of two sequential steps. In the first step, a molded
component is produced inside the mold, and cooled to its solid-
state, in the second step, the mold opens, rotates and the secondin steps.
D. Dias, C. Peixoto, R. Marques et al. International Journal of Lightweight Materials and Manufacture 5 (2022) 137e152shot of resin is injected into the molding cavity over the first
molded component [86]. During the second injection, the interface
of the previously injected component is heated, and a bond is
formed at the molecular level [87]. Fig. 10 exemplifies the above
mentioned process. The bonding of the two parts is assured by a
degree of melting of the first injected component during the in-
jection of the second part [88]. This allows the producer to reduce
costs in production by cutting to the number of steps necessary to
develop a molded part with different combinations [89]. However,
the technique is limited by the materials used, where weak bonds
can lead to poor mechanical performance [90], for this reason, it is
crucial that material compatibility is guaranteed early in the
developing steps. As for applications, this technology usually is
associated with multi-color or multi-material, and soft-rigid com-
ponents [91] with the possibility of mastering complex parts with
improved efficiency and quality. Its main drawbacks lie in material
suitability to the product while maintaining dimensional stability
[87]. In Table 3 are presented the key advantages and disadvantages
of the techniques discussed above, and referenced the main ap-
plications for the different technologies. The techniques are pre-
sented independently from each other, with the exception of the
FIM production techniques which are presented separated in the
end application, as this category represents the major divergences.
As the FIM process, the 2 K shot technology can represent an
alternative to cover any surface defects that may exist in the MIM
produced component. By injecting a new component over the MIM
produced component, all the defects can be completely masked by
maintaining the weight reduction provided by MIM in the core of
the produced part.
5. Technology integration
The combination of the abovementioned technologies may help
reduce the number of steps necessary, in an integrated process,
lowering energetic costs and raising efficiency by decreasing pro-
duction time and increasing cadence [29,40]. The integration of two
or more of the mentioned technologies enables the possibility to
obtain a product with reduced use of raw material, with higher
functionality, and aesthetically agreeable [6,33]. In fact, integrating
different technologies is not a new practice in the packaging in-
dustry. In 2008, Britton Decorative patented the process of creatingTable 3
Technologies: advantages, disadvantages, and main applications.
Technologies Advantages Disadvantages
Film Insert
Molding
IMD Good adhesion;
Hides surface part defects;
Cleaner technology than similar
methods (spray coating);
Eliminates the necessity of additional
steps, reducing costs;
Adds functionality in a one-step process
(IME).
Carefully select
material; comp
Film introductio
differentiated h
increase warpa
An incorrect film
wrinkles and vi
IML
IME
MIM Reduces part weight - up to 30%;
Less raw material used;
Cycle time savings - 10%e40%;
No packing needed;
More design freedom - design of 1:1
(wall thickness to rib structure).
Less mechanica
Costly investme
Requires specifi
Requires the us
2 K shot High adhesion and mechanical integrity
Higher aesthetics quality can be
achieved;
Eliminates the assembly step.
Compatibility d
Requires two in
rotational mold
145raised areas, in packaging, with MuCell® technology combined
with IML. Films with 30e50 mm of thickness, the area with resin
were injected simultaneously with the expansion agent to ensure
that the printed areawould not adhere to the plastic material but to
the MuCell® part, originating the raised effect [94]. In 2014, Uni-
lever was the pioneer in the production of packaging using Zote-
foam's MuCell® Extrusion technology for its Body Wash Bottles
combined with IML technology, ensuring a reduction of 15% of the
material used in the bottles [95,96]. Some food packaging, such as
butter and yogurt are also produced by the integration of MuCell®
and IML technology, being reported a 10% increase in thermal
insulation, also, achieving 40% clamp tonnage reduction and a 15%
decrease in cavity pressure [97,98]. In 2013, Engel presented Dol-
phin technology [99] as a high-end decorative component for the
automotive industry with cost-effective production. The products
resulted from a balance between the soft touch and engaging looks.
The technology is an outcome of the integration of MuCell®, 2 K
injection molding, and compression technology [100]. Chen et al.
[57], studied the possibility of reducing visual defects of a MIM
molded component with the insertion of a film (PET þ PC) in the
mold cavity, acting as an insulator between the mold surface and
the melt, delaying the heat transfer, combining IMD and MIM
technologies. It was reported a significant increase in the surface
quality of the molded component and even a decrease in rough-
ness, the setup and results of the introduction of film are presented
in Fig. 11, where can be observed a reduction of defects on the
surface of the molded part with the increase in thickness.
In an attempt to evaluate the feasibility of a hybrid co-injection
and MIM molding process, Turng and Kharbas [84] used different
colored materials and co-injected a part, where the core material
was produced by MIM and the shell a solid material. It was observed
a decrease of the sinkmarks and an improvement of the dimensional
stability of the molded components while maintaining the surface
quality presented by the shell material. Similar toTurng's study, skin/
core approach Suhartono et al. [101] have also investigated a way to
enhance the surface quality ofMIMmolded components by using co-
injection molding, For the production of the parts it was used
polypropylene (PP) and PP with glass fiber for MIM production.
Higher weight reduction of the injected PP with glass fiber was
achieved, explained by higher Melt Flow Index (MFI), and weaker
melt strength that allowed better cellular nucleation and enhancedMain Applications Ref.
ion of compatible
atibility
n induces a
eat transfer that may
ge;
fixation results in
sible defects;
High-end applications with high
durability;
Displays;
Automotive interior parts
[60,67]
Logo imprinted products
Label of food packaging and cosmetics
Products for low-end applications
[76,92]
High-end applications with electronic
components
Electronic displays
Automotive interior parts (central
console, instruments panel)
[71,72]
l strength
nt
c equipment
e of a blowing agent
Automotive part interiors and motor
components
Packaging, food, and cosmetics
HVAC systems
[33,93]
ependent
jection units and
ing plates
Toys
Toothbrushes
Tool handles
[87,91]
Fig. 11. Illustration of (1) the setup used for the study, (2) results (a) with no film, (b) with a film insert with a thickness of 0.125 mm, and (c) with a film insert with a thickness of
0.188 mm, reprinted with the permission of [57].
Fig. 12. Surface profile, topography, and shrinkage results from the IMD, CIM, IMD/MIM, and MIM samples tested by Guo's team, reprinted with the permission of [60].
D. Dias, C. Peixoto, R. Marques et al. International Journal of Lightweight Materials and Manufacture 5 (2022) 137e152
146
D. Dias, C. Peixoto, R. Marques et al. International Journal of Lightweight Materials and Manufacture 5 (2022) 137e152surface appearance when compared to the MIM PP molded
component. Recently, Guo et al. [60] presented a thorough study on
the integration of IMD/MIM to improve surface finishing. The MIM
molded component presented the loss of mechanical properties,
with lower stiffness and decreased flexural strength, but showing
little differencewhen comparedwith the solid counterpart.With the
integration of IMD in the process, Guo et al. managed to reduce
surface defects, due to the slower heat transfer, results presented in
Fig. 12. However, it led to an increase of the warpage in the molded
component due to the film in the surface, resulting in contrasting
temperatures in the mold and different cooling rates. Also, when
comparing MIM with CIM, was reported smaller warpage reduction
for theMIMþ IMDwas due to the expansion of the cells in the cavity.
Another significant result refers to higher cell size, on the sidewhich
contains the film due to the higher temperature, increasing ther-
modynamic instability of the gas, lowering the material solubility,
which increases the nucleation rate, and the slower cooling phase
allows the cell to grow.
The study developed by Guo et al. exhibited an increased
warpage when FIM is considered which is in agreement with the
literature. However, the preservation of the mechanical property is
not coherent, as the produced part possesses regions with different
cell sizes, which should be reflected in lower or inconsistent me-
chanical properties.
In a similar study, Kui et al. [102] have carried out an experiment
in an attempt to prove that the application of a film in the mold can
be beneficial to reduce the superficial defects of the MIM molded
component. In the study, a PET film was used to reduce the surface
roughness and nano-CaCO3 was introduced in the composition in
order to maintain mechanical properties. The integration of IMD
and MIM technologies was carried out with a single film thickness
and resulted in different weight reductions, between 2 wt% and
10 wt%. Contrary to the expected, the foamed composites resulted
in molded parts with higher tensile properties when compared
with the solid molded part produced by CIM. Likewise, for flexural
strength, onMIMmolded part, when comparedwith CIM, being the
best result achievedwith the incorporation of 6 wt% of nano-CaCO3.
The cellular structure also improved with the incorporation of the
nanoparticles. Above 6 wt% incorporation, the nanoparticles
agglomerate resulting in nucleation deficient spots. The film-
covered side was evaluated, by surface analysis. A smoother sur-
face with lesser defects was observed as a result of slower cooling.
The incorporation of the nanoparticles contributed to the reduction
of cell formation on the part surface by restricting their movements
from the core to the cavity wall. This study provides interesting
insights with the combination of the introduction of nanoparticles
in the material composition, and the MIM technology, resulting in
products with higher mechanical properties coupled with weight
reduction, demonstrating the importance of further investigation
in this theme.
In Table 4, are chronologically presented the studies and patents
reviewed above, highlighting the technologies employed, materials
used, and the main results.
The most recent studies reflect the advantages and benefits of
using dedicated software, specifically developed for MIM, in a
specialized numerical simulation to prevent problems during pro-
duction, and predict weight reduction, cell size distribution as well
as cell density. By simulating the cell growth, the software pos-
sesses the capability to predict warpage behavior and sink marks
reduction even to a close approximation of reality. The majority of
MIM numerical simulation studies reported in the literature are
focused on the process itself [103e105] and few studies focus on
the integration of processes, for instance, Yan et al. [102] reported
numerical simulation images for temperature prediction, but the
numerical simulation study is not further discussed.147In this section, two studies with the integration of technologies
and the use of numerical simulation inMoldex3D andMoldflow, the
most used software, will be briefly analyzed. The 1st study, already
presented above will be further disclosed in this section. As depicted
above, the integration and comparison of MIM with different injec-
tion molding technologies was analyzed with resort to numerical
simulation, with a focus on the shrinkage and warpage behavior of
the developed components. The results showed a close approxima-
tion to the expected behavior of the molded part, as can be observed
in Fig. 13, were the relation of the predicted mold temperatures in all
samples (IMD, CIM, IMD/MIM, MIM) with the warpage behavior and
the introduction of a film in the cavity influence is examined. Also
notorious is the predicted warpage tendency reflected on the mol-
ded part. It may also be concluded that the introduction of a film
during the molding process will strongly affect the warpage of the
MIM and CIM molded components, almost to the same extent,
although it was expected lower warpage for MIM.
Yang et al. [106] studied the effect of the incorporation of a film
on the surface morphology of a MIM produced component, inte-
grating the MIM and IMD technologies. With resort to numerical
simulationwas possible to predict the warpage created by the film
incorporation and different cooling rates through the molded
part. As a form of validation of the numerical study, the part was
experimentally reproduced. It was reported a 3% error of simu-
lated temperature compared to the experimental molded
component. The effect of the film in the polymer crystallization
was also evaluated, concluding that the film incorporation results
in a higher crystallization due to slower cooling time, allowing
more time for the crystallization process to occur. In the presented
cases, the numerical studies helped to predict the warpage
behavior of MIM components, as well as the density of the molded
part and cell size, however, numerical simulation cannot yet
provide an exact replica for the analyzed model, for instance,
there is an over prediction of the warpage values in the injected
part. For this reason, the use of numerical simulation in the study
of integrated processes is not yet widely employed. From what is
gathered from the reported studies, the differences between
software are scarce and either option, Moldex3D or Moldflow, is
valid for simulating the MIM process. It is noteworthy that in the
process simulation, as in any Computer Aided Engineering (CAE)
software, the results obtained are indicative and enable to predict
the material behavior, detect potential problems, and help with
cost reduction by digitalizing some product development stages.
It is, however, important to underline that this analysis does not
replace fundamental knowledge about polymeric materials, mold
design, and the injection molding process and, therefore, contains
a low percentage of associated error, still, simulations are very
useful to support the work of product developers. Therefore, it is
possible to notice that new studies using numerical simulation are
increasing, and it is expected that in the future, numerical simu-
lations may predict more accurately the injection molding process
of MIM components.
6. Microcellular Injection Molding trends and outlooks
MIM technology is nowadays the focus of several projects
worldwide. The possibility to produce one material components,
and therefore completely recyclable, with reducedmaterial amount
is the driving force of the technology as it presents a solution for the
hard to recycle fiber filler thermoplastics. In a big production sys-
tem, it may represent savings of tons of material to produce the
parts, translating in savings for the producing companies. In the
future, it is expected that the cost of this technology will be lower
due to the high demand and the development of new technologies
for MIM parts production. The application of such components in
Table 4
Literature review of MIM integration with FIM and Co-Injection technologies.
Title Year Technologies
employed
Commercial
owner
Material Remarks Ref.
Development of a Hybrid Solid-
Microcellular Co-injection Molding
Process
2004 Co-Injection,
MIM
e Polystyrene (PS) Successful Integration of technologies with
shell/core layout, resulting in 90% reduction
of sink marks and guaranteeing
dimensional stability; Higher weight
reduction with the increase of the core
volume (microcellular) compared to the
core solid part;
Formation of a thinner, longer, and more
uniform core/shell part.
[84]
Method for producing at least one
raised area on a plastic container
2008 MuCell®, IML Britton
Decorative
PP, polyethylene
(PET) film
Film thickness of 30e50 mm, combined
technology for a raised effect.
[94]
Using thermally insulated polymer film
for mold temperature control to
improve the surface quality of
microcellular injection molded parts
2008 MuCell®, IMD e Polycarbonate (PC),
PET film, N2
From no film insert to film thickness
variation, maximum 0.188 mm, PBA
content of 0.3 wt%; Surface roughness
reduced from 5.6 mm to 1.8 mm (78%e93%
reduction); MuCell® marks were removed
by a film layer of 0.188 mm.
[57]
A new quality of soft touch 2013 MuCell®, IMD Engel e Combines dolphin technology to produce a
cost-effective solution with soft touch.
[99]
Unilever launches breakthrough
packaging technology that uses 15%
less plastic
2014 MuCell®, IML Unilever® e Extruded product, combined with
Zotefoams; With the technology, Unilever®
reduced the materials used by 15% in the
Dove bottles.
[95,96]
MuCell® Technology Beneficial for
Unique Packaging Applications:
Innovative 3D In-Mold Technology
Provides Multi-Sensory Experience
for Consumers
2014 MuCell®, IML Paccor/Unilever e The producer claims that achieved, material
reduction e 6%; Clamp tonnage reduction -
40%; Cavity pressure reduction e 15%.
[97]
Improvement on the surface quality of
microcellular injection molded parts
using microcellular co-injection
molding with the material
combinations of PP and PP-GF
2017 MuCell®,
Co-injection
molding
e PP, PP-glass fiber
(10 wt%)
Shell/core layout to improve surface
quality; 5.1% weight reduction for PP,
increased to 8% by glass fiber incorporation;
Higher weight reduction on PP/PP without
incorporation of glass fiber explained by
heavier nucleation, and smaller cells; The
co-injected part possesses higher gloss,
46.6% higher when compared with the
Mucell® part.
[101]
A combined in-mold decoration and
microcellular injection molding
method for preparing foamed
products with improved surface
appearance
2019 MuCell®, IMD e PP, PET film Film thickness of 0.2 mm, PBA content of
0.5 wt%; The numerical simulation used to
study shrinkage and warpage tendency;
Reduced surface roughness with IMD when
compared to MIM; Reduced warpage,
2.1 mm with CIM to 1.6 mm with MIM;
Higher warpage than MIM alone due to
slower heat transfer and asymmetrical
cooling.
[60]
Investigation on Foamed PP/Nano-
CaCO3 Composites in a Combined in-
Mold Decoration and Microcellular
Injection Molding Process
2020 MIM, IMD e PP, CaCO3, PET film,
N2
Film thickness of 0.2 mm and PBA content
of 0.5 wt% of N2; Higher tensile, flexural,
and impact strength was achieved by the
incorporation of 6 wt% CaCO3 when
compared with CIM; Film incorporation
guaranteed a smoother surface due to
higher temperatures and slower cooling
times.
[102]
Investigation on forming defects and
crystallization of plastic parts in
combined in-mold decoration and
microcellular injection molding
based on a multiphase flow-solid
coupled heat transfer model
2020 MuCell®, IMD e PP, PET film, N2 Film thickness variation form 0e0.3 mm,
PBA content of 0.5 wt% of N2; Numerical
simulation of IMD/MIM process through
implicit domain coupling algorithm (IDCA);
Higher warpage for higher film thickness
(0.7e1.5 mm); Almost 30% increase in
crystallization for 0.2 mm of film thickness.
[106]
D. Dias, C. Peixoto, R. Marques et al. International Journal of Lightweight Materials and Manufacture 5 (2022) 137e152stricter industries, i.e. automotive, is still a challenge due to the loss
of mechanical properties when compared with CIM. Some studies
claim to improve themechanical properties by controlling themold
andmelt temperature [102,107], gas counter pressure [108], or with
the introduction of fillers to act as reinforcement [109], nonethe-
less, it is still insufficient to reach the high standards employed by
the automotive industry. New developments have emerged on the
production of molded components with a nanocellular structure by148controlling high pressure foam injection molding, resulting in
molded components with good mechanical strength and reported
surface appearance closely relating to the conventional counterpart
[110]. However, these findings are still laboratory-based and
require further studies to be adopted by the industry.
The poor surface finish of the molded components is its biggest
drawback and for that reason, recent studies focus on alternatives
to overcome this problem. Chang et al. [111] took advantage of the
Fig. 13. Comparison of the warpage and temperature difference on both sides among the IMD, CIM, IMD/MIM, and MIM samples, reprinted with the permission of [60].
D. Dias, C. Peixoto, R. Marques et al. International Journal of Lightweight Materials and Manufacture 5 (2022) 137e152low packing phase and clamping force needed for MIM and used
aluminum material (QC-10) and highly polishable steel (M333),
both with high thermal conductivity to produce mold inserts with
the cooling system. With this study, it was possible to improve
surface finish by a quick cooling rate and without significant
damage to the mold inserts. Chen et al. [105] developed a special
coating of PFTE and Zirconia to improve MIM produced compo-
nents surface. These new solutions combined with the already
discussed technologies, gas counter-pressure, and RCHM, help to
improve the popularity of the technology.
As the industry moves towards sustainable processes, so does
the MIM technology, as a new trend by combining MIM with bio-
based thermoplastics [38,112,113] representing an alternative to the
conventional petroleum-based components. However, processing
such materials has its challenges, mainly due to the higher pro-
cessing difficulties associated with these biobased plastics, thus
additional research is required. In the specific case of biopolymers,
due to the processing difficulties, for example, low processing
temperatures are required to improve, the introduction of a PBA in
the system reduces de viscosity of the polymer melt, enabling in-
jection molding at lower temperatures than the usual operating
temperatures of the polymer [114].
Regarding the integration of MIM with other technologies, it
seems to be a clear trend that allows the producer to cut down the
materials while giving the product functionality in a one-step
process while reducing warpage complications.7. Concluding remarks
MIM is a clear trend for the injection molding industry, in the
present work, the technology is addressed and the integration of
2 K Shot, IMD, IML, IME with MIM is reviewed. The integration,
when successful, is of high profit and capable of producing com-
ponents in a one step process, reducing costs and boosting new
developments. It may result in molded components with fewer
defects, higher functionality, versatility, and increased product
value. However, the process is challenging due to different re-
quirements from the different technologies, increasing in
complexity with the conjugation FIM with MIM. This means that
the injection molding machine requires a significant capital in-
vestment, and the production sequence must be carefully studied
early in the developing phase. At an early stage, numerical
simulation can help to predict potential problems, address them
early and diminish the postproduction modifications. But, as far as
we can identify, the combination of these technologies is not149easily found in the literature even though it can save time and can
be a strong ally as it may result in cost savings. The reduced me-
chanical performance of the MIM produced components, is still a
challenge to overcome, discouraging the industry from appointing
MIM as a manufacturing technology to produce a high-end
product market. This is why, the integrative setup should be
considered as an alternative, where mechanical performance may
be enhanced and the aesthetic element optimized while retaining
the weight loss characteristic of the MIM molded part. Since this
type of process integration is still underexplored, new problems
are arising, for instance, when FIM is combined with MIM, the
residual gas that slowly migrates to the surface of the molded part
is trapped in the film/plastic interface. As a solution, process
optimization with variation of gas introduction (wt%) and injec-
tion velocity could be considered to prevent such issues. Also, the
incorporation of nanoparticles should be considered to overcome
the loss of mechanical properties. These are some examples where
the industry should focus its innovative efforts. Thanks to the
current demand in the European Union for the reduction of ma-
terial waste and plastic, in recent years more studies have been
published on MIM integration with other technologies. In the
future, it is expected that the integration of these technologies
will be a strong part of the injection molding market, especially
for high-end applications.
Funding
This work was supported by the European Regional Develop-
ment Fund (ERDF), through the Competitiveness and Internation-
alization Operational Program (COMPETE 2020) of the Portugal
2020 Program [I&DPIIMIO - I&D de Processos para Injeç~ao Inte-
grada POCI-01-0247-FEDER-042832].