We are all familiar with the word “integrity” and have some common
understanding of it. It is generally accepted that honesty and reliability
are two important aspects of integrity. Specific to scientific research,
what is research integrity?Why does it matter? Is it just the responsibility
of researchers themselves or a shared responsibility of the entire research
community?
Clarification of the concept can give us a clearer understanding of
how research integrity comes about and help us to have a better idea of
the ways in which it can be fostered. “‘Research integrity’ refers to the
principles and standards that have the purpose to ensure validity and
trustworthiness of research [1].” It is not just about avoidance of
misconduct, but interlinked with morality [2]. TheWorld Conferences on
Research Integrity Foundation (WCRIF) proposed that honesty,
accountability, professional courtesy, fairness, and good stewardship are
the hallmarks of research integrity [1]. The Singapore Statement on
Research Integrity presented four principles and 14 responsibilities as a
global guide to the responsible conduct of research in 2010. The state-
ment emphasizes that honesty, accountability, professional courtesy and
fairness, and good stewardship are fundamental to the integrity of
research wherever it is undertaken [3]. The Montreal Statement on
Research Integrity in Cross-Boundary Research Collaborations in 2013
elaborated four general collaborative responsibilities, seven re-
sponsibilities in managing the collaboration, four responsibilities in
collaborative relationships, and five responsibilities for outcomes of
research [4]. In the 5th World Conference on Research Integrity in
Amsterdam, 2017, four agenda items were proposed to assure that
research is undertaken in accordance with the Singapore Statement [5].
Five principles were presented in the Hong Kong Principles (2019),
which show “a specific focus on the need to drive research improvement
through ensuring that researchers are explicitly recognized and rewarded
for behaviors that strengthen research integrity [6].”
Science is a basic component of human knowledge infrastructure and
its foundation is publication. The International Science Council (ISC)
proposed that modern systems of scientific and scholarly publishing
serve “the interests of science [7].” According to the theory of interest,
the interests of science can be divided into subjective and objective as-
pects. The subjective aspect is its satisfaction to the subject, and the
objective aspect is the scientific interest itself. ISC takes science as a
global public good. “The knowledge that has been accumulated since the
earliest days of scientific practice is continually refreshed, renewed and
re-evaluated by new experiments, new observations and new theoretical
insights, and publicly communicated in the published record of science
[7].” We lay great stress on research integrity because validity andhttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoms.2021.11.005
Available online 6 December 2021
2589-9651/© 2021 Chongqing University. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on bcredibility of research show significant importance to the interests of
science. “If one falsifies data one not only harms scientific truth but also
treats other researchers unfairly [8].” That is why we need honesty and
trustworthiness in research. It is the way to ensure scientific continuity
and sustainable development. In other words, to advance the research
integrity is to advance the interests of science.
Literature discusses research integrity from various perspectives,
including but not limited to the concept of research integrity [2,8], the
relationship between research integrity and research supervision and
education [9], and strategies to promote research integrity [2,10]. Most
literature shows a consensus that scientific integrity is a shared re-
sponsibility of all parties in the research community. Different opinions
exist over who should shoulder the main responsibility. Abdulghani
Muthanna and Ahmed Alduais assert that more responsibility falls onto
the shoulders of instructors and supervisors [9]. According to The World
Conference on Research Integrity Foundation, “While research integrity
applies to all parties in the research endeavour, it most importantly relies
on the conduct of researchers [1].” The latter is aligned with our belief
that researchers play a central role in maintaining research integrity,
while other parties of the research community play important roles of
education and supervision in their respective fields. The former is
self-discipline that requires researchers to obey their inner moral law,
and the latter is heteronomy constructed by institutional norms. We
argue that the unity of self-discipline and heteronomy can better foster
research integrity.2. Discussion
2.1. First CQU Webinar on Research Integrity
Universities play an important role in cultivating students and junior
researchers. In order to implement the spirit of the Central Government's
“Several Opinions on Further Strengthening the Construction of Scien-
tific Research Integrity” and other related documents, to create a good
research environment conducive to innovation and creativity, and build a
healthy academic ecology of honesty and trustworthiness, Chongqing
University held the first International Seminar on Research Integrity in
the afternoon of September 7, 2021. This was also broadcast live
worldwide in both Chinese and English.
The seminar focused on “Research Education: Tying the First Button
for Students’ Research”, aiming to integrate the frontier of research
integrity in the world to strengthen education and publicity on research
integrity. It will help teachers, students and researchers in colleges and
universities familiarize themselves with the specific requirements for
research integrity, provide guidance to consciously resist academicehalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd.
J. Y. Xue et al. Nano Materials Science 3 (2021) 319–320misconduct and carry out responsible scientific research. In the future,
Chongqing University will continue to hold more international seminars
on research integrity, strengthen research integrity education and pub-
licity, cooperate to carry out research on new issues in building research
integrity and contribute to building a healthy and sustainable academic
ecology.
2.2. Views from researchers and editors
Prof. Yuehong (Helen) Zhang, Dr. Nandita Quaderi and Dr. Elisabeth
Bik were invited to give academic talks in the First CQU Webinar on
Research Integrity. From the perspectives of scientists and journal edi-
tors, they discussed open science and research integrity, shared thoughts
on creating an academic ecology to identify misconduct in research
integrity, proposed initiatives to deal with academic misconduct and
called on the whole community to fulfill their responsibilities and play a
more active role in building research integrity.
Prof. Zhang issued a report entitled “What should be our next steps to
move forward in support of truth and integrity?“. She presented that
open science brings greater transparency, which can promote research
integrity. She shared steps and practices carried out worldwide. As a
senior editor, she supported a journal's publication of identification of
mistakes and errors. Her research team proposed a new index, the “Ac-
ademic Integrity Awareness Index” for future discussions across the
linked spheres of publishing and research [11].
Dr. Quaderi is Editor-in-Chief and Editorial VP of Web of Science. She
believed that research integrity is a shared responsibility and gave a
report on “Research Integrity: Understanding our shared responsibility
for a sustainable scholarly ecosystem” to stress the role Web of Science
plays in the process. According to the ISI research integrity report,
research should be conducted with integrity, meaning that it is trust-
worthy, honest and ethical. The report explains that research integrity
can be undermined in different stages of the research process. “There are
many stakeholders responsible for upholding research integrity and there
is no single group that can fix failures in research integrity.” Dr. Quaderi
called on all parties, including researchers, publishers, institutions, fun-
ders, database and metrics providers, to take different countermeasures
to identify and tackle problems of misconduct. The Web of Science has
been committed to maintaining research integrity and providing data
and metrics you can trust by strictly selecting high quality journals,
increasing diligence against “hijacked” journals, and flagging journals
under investigation for quality concerns. It launched Web of Science
Academy in March 2021, providing free, online training for the research
community [12].
Dr. Bik focused on “The Dark Side of Science: Misconduct in Scientific
Research”. She emphasized that science publications are like bricks in a
wall to build the science building. Papers containing errors or fraudulent
data might cause a waste of time and money because of failures in
replicating those results. She detected misconduct in papers from the
perspective of research images that are unique and classified image
duplication into three types: simple, repositioned, and altered. 800 of32020,621 papers (4%) with duplicated figures were found. Even though
some of them are honest errors, 2% are intentional. “Science misconduct
is damaging for scientists, but also for science itself.” Dr. Bik gave sug-
gestions on how to avoid misconduct for professors and group leaders
from the perspective of research education, and for journal editors and
publishers being the gate-keepers of science publications [13].
3. Conclusion
In the words of Immanuel Kant, “Two things fill the mind with ever
new and increasing admiration and awe, the oftener and the more
steadily we reflect on them: the starry heavens above and the moral law
within [14].” We believe that reflection on the moral law in mind will
guide all parties to take responsibilities and take actions to uphold
research integrity. All parties should always on the path of maintaining
the interests of science.