This study investigated the characteristics of plasma ionization that occurs during plasma arc discharge in water 
using carbon electrodes. The characterization of plasma ionization begins by observing the arc shape using a 
digital camera associated with voltage oscillation using current and voltage vs. time (I-t and V-t) characteristics. 
Furthermore, the ionization energy calculation is performed using simultaneous I-t and V-t measurement data. 
These calculations are then compared to the photon energy from the optical emission spectroscopy (OES). The 
results from the digital camera indicate four types of arc discharge in terms of shape and intensity related to 
voltage oscillation. Moreover, the energy calculations show that by using the I-t and V-t methods is possible to 
measure the plasma ionization detected not only in the range 1–4 eV but also in the outside range, including 
smaller than 1 eV and greater than 4 eV. These ranges correspond to the emission lines in visible light, infrared, 
and ultraviolet, respectively. In addition, the I-t and V-t methods can also measure the excitation and recom-
bination energy of the arc discharge plasma ionization. This study reveals the possibility of investigating the 
characteristics of plasma ionization using simultaneous I-t and V-t measurements, which comprise an easier and 
more practical method in the diagnostics of carbon nanoparticle synthesis   
1. Introduction 
Over the past decade, plasma diagnostics has been a topic of interest 
for researchers studying the characteristics of plasma species in various 
fields, such as electronics [1], materials synthesis [2], energy [3], and 
even medicine [4]. One of the plasma applications in materials syn-
thesis, carbon nanomaterial fabrication is a key plasma application. The 
most common plasma methods for synthesizing carbon nanomaterials 
are laser ablation [5,6], chemical vapor deposition (CVD) [7,8], and arc 
discharge [9]. The arc discharge method has some benefits making it 
preferable to other methods, including fewer defects and high flexibility. 
During the arc discharge process, electrons are discharged from the 
cathode to the anode, causing energy to be released in the gap between 
two electrodes. The energy is released in the form of plasma arc 
discharge at high temperatures, resulting in electrode surface erosion 
and the formation of carbon nanoparticles [10]. Carbon nanotubes 
(CNTs) and carbon nano-onions are typical examples of nanoparticles 
grown in vacuum arc discharge [11] and underwater-submerged arc 
discharge [12], respectively. 
From a technical point of view, many different methods, such as 
spectroscopy (visible, UV, X-ray), probing, magnetics, laser-aided di-
agnostics, particle diagnostics, and fusion product diagnostics, have 
been employed to measure the spatial profile and evolution of various 
plasma parameters. Such parameters include the following: atomic 
(ionic) processes; electron temperatures; plasma currents; plasma posi-
tion, shape, and instability; excited states of specific ion species; energy 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: miftahwar@ft.uns.ac.id (M. Anwar).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Micro and Nano Engineering 
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/micro-and-nano-engineering 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mne.2021.100099 
Received 12 July 2021; Received in revised form 7 November 2021; Accepted 8 December 2021   
Micro and Nano Engineering 14 (2022) 100099
2
spectrums of neutral particles escaping from plasma; and fusion re-
actions of specific atoms or particles [13]. Although most of these 
techniques are well established, plasma diagnostics remains a chal-
lenging and vivid discipline in which researchers are constantly striving 
for ways to perform measurements with greater accuracy. 
Diagnostics for plasma arc discharge generally use optical emission 
spectroscopy (OES), which detects ionized emission species [14]. 
However, the Langmuir probe can also be used to determine the density 
of ions that occur, as well as plasma and electron temperatures (in en-
ergy) [15]. Thus far, some researchers have applied simultaneous cur-
rent and voltage vs. time (I-t and V-t) data from the arc discharge to 
determine the current and voltage conditions when plasma ionization 
occurs [16–18], including investigating pressure wave propagation 
characteristics [19] and bubble expansion in water [20]. Nevertheless, 
the utilization of simultaneous I-t and V-t measurements as a probing 
method for the ionization energy of plasma arc discharge, which is 
crucial for understanding the arc shapes and ionization processes of 
plasma, has never been achieved. 
We recently explored the effect of current source variation on the 
growth of carbon nanoparticles in the underwater-submerged arc 
discharge [21] and on the energy needed during the first peak of the 
current [22]. In this paper, for the diagnostics of carbon nanoparticle 
synthesis, the ionization characteristics of the arc discharge phenome-
non underwater using simultaneous I-t and V-t measurements are dis-
cussed. Changes in current, voltage, and photographic data on arc 
shapes during arc discharge are also investigated. Afterward, a numer-
ical analysis of single discharge energy is calculated from the I-t and V-t 
measurement results to obtain the plasma arc discharge parameters i.e., 
ionic excitation and recombination process. In addition, this I-t and V-t 
measurement is compared to the OES data to carry out the ionization 
energy of plasma arc discharge. 
2. Measurements and setup 
The experiments were conducted using a carbon arc setup, as shown 
in Fig. 1. This setup consisted of two graphite (99%) electrodes, with a 
diameter of 1 cm, connected to metal handles, which were dipped in de- 
ionized water (⁓30 cm from the surface) with a resistance of ⁓1 MΩ. 
The negative electrode (cathode) was deliberately formed with a 
conical-shaped tip so that the discharged electrons were concentrated at 
one point. As expected, the potential energy led to an increase in the 
erosion of and the gap between the electrodes [23] resulting carbon 
nanoparticles. At that point, a discharge current (i.e., the current be-
tween two electrodes) of 40 A was maintained. A current ranging from 
30 to 50A is known to be an effective value for growing nano-onions 
[24]. Depending on the electrodes gap and the anode diameter, the 
discharge voltage is in the range of 0–30 V. This voltage includes the 
voltage drop across the electrodes. In the present study, the arc was 
operated in de-ionized water at atmospheric pressure. 
The arc was initiated when the electrodes came close to each other by 
manually moving the cathode. The distance between the electrodes was 
kept constant (at around 0.4 mm [20]) as long as the arc discharge 
continues until it stops naturally due to erosion at the anode to be 
nanoparticles. To minimize the effect of water flow caused by electrode 
movement, a mechanical gear was connected to the electrode handle to 
smoothly move the electrode forward and backward. Next, the current 
was controlled by maintaining the external DC current source. During 
arc operation, carbon nanoparticles were formed, which were then 
collected by filtering. The remaining water was removed using a heater 
at 200 ◦C and separated via centrifugation at 4000 rpm (5 min). The 
dried carbon deposit was further characterized using scanning electron 
microscopy (SEM, FEI ISPECT-S50, acceleration voltage of 25 kV) and 
transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL JEM-1400, an acceler-
ating voltage of 120 kV). 
The applied voltage was measured using a 1:100 differential probe 
Fig. 1. A schematic of the experimental setup consisting of a water-filled chamber, carbon electrodes, a current sensor, voltage sensors, a data acquisition system, a 
spectrometer, and a computer. 
M. Anwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Micro and Nano Engineering 14 (2022) 100099
3
(ISDS205) voltage sensor that was connected in parallel to the electrode 
gap. The current measurements were carried out using the WCS1500 
Hall effect current sensor. The voltage and current values were con-
nected to CH1 and CH2 of the data acquisition system, respectively, and 
then presented in real time to the order of milliseconds. Moreover, OES 
measurement was also performed to investigate the arc emission char-
acteristics. The spectra were measured using an Ocean Optics Maya 
2000 spectrophotometer with an exposure of 1 ms and a repetition rate 
of 1000 Hz. To investigate the condition when plasma occurred, a digital 
camera with a speed of 30 frames/s was utilized. With this camera, we 
were able to record plasma arc states (size and shape). In order to obtain 
the energy parameter of arc discharge plasma i.e., ionic excitation and 
recombination process, the energy calculation was then performed to 
compare single discharge energy, derived from I-t and V-t data, and 
single photon energy taken from OES data. 
3. Results and discussion 
Carbon powder produced by arc discharge was characterized using 
SEM and TEM, as shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b), respectively. The carbon 
nanoparticles observed in the SEM image had a spherical shape with a 
diameter of 10–50 nm. Using TEM, the structures of the carbon nano-
particles were confirmed to be carbon onions—i.e., spherical carbon 
nanoparticles consisting of many layers, as shown in the inset of Fig. 2 
(b). 
The current and voltage versus time characteristics of submerged arc 
discharge were measured at a steady current of 40 A in real time, as 
shown in Fig. 3. The ON-state in current and voltage characteristics 
indicated the existence of arc discharge events, while the OFF-state 
indicated no arc events (I = 0 A; V = ⁓ 42 V) during measurement. 
The initial current of the ON-state was always high (more than 100 A), 
which indicated that the number of charges flowing between electrodes 
reached a maximum level due to the high capacitance value that 
occurred between the two electrodes. According to our recent study 
[22], when the electrodes were close enough (⁓0.4 mm), the potential 
energy was able to break down the dielectric of water, and the arc was 
naturally initiated. On the other hand, the current value was in a steady 
state (40 A) when the arc events were maintained. However, at this 
point, the voltage level fluctuated (0 to 30 V), which was likely due to 
plasma ionization between the two electrodes. During the 5.5 s range of 
Fig. 2. (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of carbon nanoparticles. (b) TEM observation confirms the carbon onion structures, which consist of many layers.  
Fig. 3. I-t and V-t characteristics of arc discharge. ON/OFF states on I-t (bottom) and V-t (top) graphs indicate that arc discharge appears/disappears sequentially. 
The anode-cathode distance is ⁓0.4 mm. 
M. Anwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Micro and Nano Engineering 14 (2022) 100099
4
measurement, three initiated arc discharges occurred. A longer time 
range of arc discharge data is also shown in the supplementary data of 
Fig. S1. 
To understand the ionization characteristics of plasma at arc 
discharge, an enlarged image of the I-t and V-t of Fig. 3 at 7–8.5 s is 
shown in Fig. 4(a). In the current graph, after the first peak (state I), the 
current was stable at 40 A. On the other hand, the voltage graph shows a 
significant change in the range of 7.05 to 8.45 s before the arc dis-
appeared or turned OFF. Regarding the voltage characteristic in the 
voltage graph, there were three states (except for the initial peak at the 
beginning of the ON-state)—i.e., state II, state III, and state IV. State II 
was a state in which the voltage oscillated at a value of 0 to 20 V. In state 
III, the voltage was stable at approximately 20 V. However, in state IV, 
the voltage returned to oscillating at a value between 12 and 30 V, while 
the current was still maintained at 40 A. Supplementary data shown in 
Fig. S2 also indicates the same characteristics for a longer discharge time 
range (5 s range). 
Fig. 4(b–e) show photographs of the arc discharge in states I, II, III, 
and IV, which explain the arc state in real time. In state I (in Fig. 4(a)), 
the measured current had the highest value correlated to the arc 
condition, which is shown in Fig. 4(b). This has a broad arc shape, 
resulting in the brightest light illumination. In states II, III, and IV, as 
shown in Fig. 4(c–e), the light illumination produced by the arc weak-
ened with a smaller arc shape. Such differences in arc shape are possible 
because arch shapes vary with different plasma ionization characteris-
tics of arc discharge. 
In Fig. 4(c), which correlates with state II in Fig. 4(a), the voltage is 
shown oscillating from 0 V to ~20 V, indicating that the electrodes in 
this state were frequently connected (short circuit), thereby producing a 
drop in voltage oscillation. Thus, the represented arc light illumination 
was the dimmest compared to the others (see the magnified image in 
Fig. 4(c)). However, the arc light illumination of states III and IV, as 
shown in Fig. 4(d) and (e), respectively, were brighter than that of state 
II. Moreover, the arc shape had a typical irregular form of ionized arc 
plasma [25–27], as shown in the enlarged image. According to the 
current continuity at the cathode, the arc current was a combination of 
electron current and ion current [28,29], as indicated in Eq. (1). 
Iarc = Ielectrons + Iions (1) 
Therefore, it is understandable that state I had the high-density arc 
Fig. 4. (a) I-t and V-t characteristics at 7 to 8.5 s, which show current and voltage oscillation of states I, II, III, and IV, and (b–e) corresponding photographs of the arc 
event underwater for each state. The anode-cathode distance is ⁓0.4 mm. 
M. Anwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Micro and Nano Engineering 14 (2022) 100099
5
current Iarc (for constant electrode area) due to the high potential energy 
dissipation of a capacitor between the two electrodes with the maximum 
charge density. State II mainly consisted of the electron current Ielectrons, 
which was indicated by the oscillation of the voltage drop, while state III 
was a mixture of Iions and Ielecrtrons (low density of Iarc), with a small 
average oscillation of the voltage profile. State IV, in contrast, primarily 
consisted of ion current Iions, as indicated by voltage oscillations from 
approximately 12 to 30 V. Oscillation to a higher voltage (to 30 V) 
showed that the electrons that flowed from the anode were suppressed 
by the potential of the excitation and recombination events of plasma 
ions that occurred between the two electrodes. 
Moreover, the intensity and wavelength values of light produced by 
plasma arc discharge have also been measured using OES, as shown in 
Fig. 5. Variations in light intensity at areas I, II, III, and IV in Fig. 5 are in 
accordance with the photographic data shown in Fig. 4(b–e), respec-
tively, which also corresponds to a different state as shown in Fig. 4(a). 
In general, the wavelength peaks observed in the OES data had the same 
pattern for all intensity variations. The emission peaks observed at 
wavelengths 351, 467, and 516 nm represented the emission of C ions 
vaporized from the electrodes. Furthermore, the peaks of 436, 486, and 
636 nm were the emission of H ions, and the peaks of 777 nm and 907 
Fig. 5. OES spectra of light-emitted arc for different intensities correspond to 
state I through state IV in I-t and V-t measurements. 
Fig. 6. (a) The power graph of the result of multiplying V and I vs. time data with the inset graph of the power oscillation with the area ΔP (height of the peak) and Δt 
(time resolution for one peak) as energy for one discharge event. (b) Derived energy from I-t and V-t measurement E1 (bar chart) and photon energy E2 from OES with 
the illustration of charge elementary reaction mechanisms for the formation of nanoparticles and air bubbles in the inset. 
M. Anwar et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
Micro and Nano Engineering 14 (2022) 100099
6
nm were the emission of oxygen (O) ions [30]. 
For further analysis, the energy E1 was calculated from the data of I-t 
and V-t of Fig. 4(a), which was be compared to the energy E2 from the 
OES data in Fig. 5. To calculate E1 and E2, Eqs. (2) and (3) were 
employed. Fig. 6 shows the results of the power vs. time (Fig. 6(a)) and 
the energy comparison (Fig. 6(b)) between the single discharge energy 
E1 from Eq. (2) (bar chart) and the photon energy E2 from Eq. (3). 
E1 =
Edisc
N
=
∫
P(t)dt
N
(2)  
E2 =
hc
λ
(3) 
Where E1 is the energy of a single discharge event of the arc plasma, 
and Edisc corresponds to the discharge energy or area of power oscillation 
changes with time caused by the discharge current. P(t) is the power 
obtained by multiplying V(t) and I(t) (Fig. 6(a)), dt is the time range of 
one peak (see inset of Fig. 6(a)) and N is the number of charges obtained 
from current I(t) data in Fig. 4(a), which is derived from N =
∫
I(t)dt
e ; e is 
the charge of electron 1.6 × 10− 19C. On the other hand, E2 in Eq. (3) 
corresponds to the photon energy detected by OES, where h, c, and λ are 
the Planck constant (6.62607004 × 10− 34 m2.kg/s), speed of light (3 ×
108 m/s), and electromagnetic wavelength in nm (obtained from OES 
data in Fig. 5), respectively. 
As shown in Fig. 6(b), the results showed similar features between E1 
(bar chart) and E2 (line spectra) at approximately 1–4 eV, which cor-
responds to the energy of visible light (at λ ≈ 400–750 nm shown in 
Fig. 4). However, significant differences in energy E1 data—i.e., peak 
appearance at a smaller energy value (< 1 eV) and a larger energy value 
(> 4 eV) were observed. This result was similar to the result obtained 
and shown in Fig. S3 (supplementary graph). 
The charge elementary reaction mechanism in the arc discharge 
system is explained in more detail in the inset of Fig. 6(b). Initially, the 
electrons leave the anode and hit the water molecules (1) when external 
DC voltage was applied. Water molecules that are hit by electrons are 
then excited (taken from the electron's kinetic energy) by releasing one 
of its charges (negative or positive charge) and transforming into several 
ionic forms (dashed blue arrows) (2). Negative ions and electrons move 
toward the anode (3), while positive ions move toward the cathode (4) 
due to the direction of the electric field between the two electrodes, 
indicated by the low-density Iarcs of state III (Fig. 4). The discharged 
electrons from the cathode may also go directly to the anode (5) in short 
circuit events, emphasizing the explanation of voltage drop oscillation in 
state II in Fig. 4. Moreover, some ions (such as carbon ions released from 
the anode, H ions, and O ions) move out of the hot zone [21] and form 
carbon nanoparticles and air bubbles (6), which causes voltage oscilla-
tion in state IV (Fig. 4(a)). The formation of nanoparticles and bubbles 
release energy in the form of light with different wavelengths (7), as 
detected in OES shown in Fig. 5. 
The fundamental difference between the two methods, including I-t 
and V-t measurement and OES, is that the I-t and V-t measurement 
methods can measure not only excitation but also the recombination 
energy due to nanoparticle and bubble formation, which is indicated by 
voltage oscillation at state IV (in Fig. 4(a)). Therefore, it can be under-
stood that the results of the I-t and V-t energy E1 can be defined as the 
energy required by the arc discharge system to carry out the ionization 
process and carbon nanoparticle formation. On the other hand, the OES 
method measures only the emission energy of the ion recombination 
process during nanoparticle and bubble formation, typically in the range 
200–1100 nm for a common spectrophotometer. The energy in the lower 
area beyond visible light (infrared areas) is most likely energy that is 
transferred to the water and electrodes in the form of phonon energy 
(heat). Conversely, the phenomenon with energy higher than 4 eV is 
detectable by I-t and V-t measurements corresponding to the higher 
voltage oscillation (states II and IV) shown in Fig. 4(a), which is highly 
possible coming from the higher excitation energy of arc plasma 
ionization. 
4. Conclusion 
Simultaneous I-t and V-t measurement methods have been demon-
strated to be effective methods for observing the characteristics of 
plasma arc discharge for diagnostics of nanoparticle synthesis. The re-
sults of this I-t and V-t measurement proved to be accurate as a probing 
method for the ionization of plasma arc discharge that can amplify OES 
measurements, which are limited to visible light measurements. These 
results show that I-t and V-t measurements can measure the ionization of 
plasma in a wide range, from smaller energy values (infrared wave-
length) to higher energy values (ultraviolet wavelength), which opens 
up new possibilities of plasma diagnostics for understanding both 
fundamental plasma sciences and applications. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgment 
We thank Y. Mahardhika and R. Fadhilah for their support in the 
experiment and discussions. All authors contributed to analyzing the 
results and reviewing the manuscript. This work was partially supported 
by Grants-in-Aid for International Collaboration (No: 452/UN27.21/ 
PN/2020), (No: 260/UN27.22/HK.07.00/2021) from Sebelas Maret 
University, and Grants-in-Aid (Hibah PPI Q1 No: NKB-601/UN2.RST/ 
HKP.05.00/2021) from University of Indonesia. 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.mne.2021.100099. 