A novel and effective experimental method for describing the evolution curves and hot maps of biomass pyrolysis 
vapors with the adjustment of sweeping gas flow rate was developed during condensation. The composition 
proportion of pyrolysis vapors was inverted from the composition quantification of segmental bio-oil recovered 
by the specific condenser with two flumes. The mathematical relationship between location and vapor compo-
sition was fitted by Slogistic function. The condensable proportion of water decreased from 85% to 60% as N2 
flow rate increased from 100 mL/min to 500 mL/min under 340 K water bath. But 500 mL/min N2 flow rate 
accelerated the disturbance of condensing field and improved the recoveries of components with stronger 
condensing abilities than water. The condensable proportion of guaiacol and its derivatives decreased from 60% 
to 40% under 300 mL/min but increased to 55% under 500 mL/min. Furthermore, the evolution difference 
between high-proportion and low-proportion components in pyrolysis vapors in the condensing field was also 
discussed as well as the unique evolution of components with azeotrope phenomenon or special solubility. For 
the first time, the adjustment mechanism of constant non-condensable components on the evolution of con-
densable components was clarified during water bath condensation, which would remarkably improve the 
comprehension for the complex phase transition process during the selective condensation of biomass pyrolysis 
vapors.   
1. Introduction 
The condensation of pyrolysis vapors was one of the core technolo-
gies for the bio-oil production from biomass pyrolysis and liquefaction 
[1]. The adjustment for condensation was a cheap and effective method 
to improve the quality of bio-oil in comparison with the optimization of 
feedstock or pyrolysis technique, which was convenient to the imme-
diate application on the pilot-scale and commercial platforms of biomass 
pyrolysis and liquefaction [2]. Within the limited condensing capacity of 
condenser, the numerous components in biomass pyrolysis vapors 
exhibited various recovery effects because of the differences in their 
condensing abilities [3]. The competitive relationship between these 
components was observed during the liquefaction of pyrolysis vapors 
and the components with strong condensing abilities were preferred to 
condense [4]. Based on this competitive relationship the selective 
condensation technology was developed to achieve the online separa-
tion of pyrolysis vapors through setting the gradient multi-staged 
condensers in a complete condensing system. The separation and 
enrichment phenomenon of bio-oil components with fractional 
condensation was analyzed by the investigations of several scholars [5, 
6]. However, these conclusions only considered the variation of bio-oil 
composition, but the actual condensing process simultaneously 
involved the frequent phase transitions of hundreds of compounds and 
how to study the componential evolution of pyrolysis vapors during 
condensation became the primary difficulty for the comprehension of 
condensing mechanism [7–9]. The component enrichment effect and 
adjustment precision of selective condensation would be improved 
significantly when the evolution mechanism of pyrolysis vapors was 
grasped in the condensing field. 
Palla et al. attempted to describe the evolution and recovery of each 
component in high-temperature biomass pyrolysis vapors during indi-
rect heat exchange through computational fluid dynamics (CFD) [10]. 
The modified Euler model was established for the numerical simulation 
of 12-component model compound of pyrolysis vapors. Compared with 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: xfzhu@ustc.edu.cn (X. Zhu).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Applications in Energy and Combustion Science 
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/applications-in-energy-and-combustion-science 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaecs.2021.100047 
Received 30 September 2021; Received in revised form 11 November 2021; Accepted 19 November 2021   
Applications in Energy and Combustion Science 9 (2022) 100047
2
the experimental results under the similar conditions of pyrolysis and 
condensation, the simulated evolution results of guaiacol and coniferyl 
alcohol were coincident whereas the negligible recovery of acetic acid or 
propionic acid was far from the actual situation [4,11,12]. The incom-
plete model compound constitution of pyrolysis vapors and unknown 
thermophysical properties of complex components led to the partial 
difference between simulation and experiment, which was hardly 
revised by the current detection and identification technologies [13]. 
Therefore, the specialized experimental investigation was more likely to 
seize the true condensing mechanism of biomass pyrolysis vapors [9]. 
The vapor and liquid distribution measured by experimental methods 
was closely related to the actual distribution on the premise of reliable 
detection means. Ill et al. reported a dynamic phase equilibrium mea-
surement for water activity in bio-oil based on Fourier transformed 
infrared spectrometer (FTIR) [14]. But the vapor-liquid distribution 
relationship of organic compounds would be not measured by this 
method because of the inaccurate quantification of FITR for organics 
[15]. Nevertheless, this study demonstrated the possibility on the 
inversion of condensable componential evolution in the condensing field 
from bio-oil components through effective experimental methods. 
Assuming the negligible chemical reactions during condensation, we 
designed a unique and practicable experimental method for the evolu-
tion of biomass pyrolysis vapors based on bio-oil composition inversion 
and function fitting [16–18]. The bio-oil from different positions of 
condensing field was recovered segmentally and the local composition 
proportion of pyrolysis vapors was inverted from bio-oil composition at 
the corresponding location. The evolution curves and distribution heat 
maps of condensable components in the condensing field were described 
by selecting suitable function to fit the relationship between vapor 
composition and location. The predictive effectiveness of this method 
was verified after the condensing field was adjusted, and the description 
precisions of linear and nonlinear functions were distinguished for the 
evolutions of different components [18]. With the assistance of this 
method the evolution distributions of water, acetic acid, furfural and 
guaiacol in walnut shell pyrolysis vapors were investigated in a vertical 
tubular heat exchanger at 273–353 K water bath temperatures, which 
particularly revealed the recovery situation of condensable components 
along with the condensing field including the initial point of conden-
sation as well as the variation tendency and peak point of recovery rate 
[16]. Besides water bath temperature, however, the condensation and 
recovery of biomass pyrolysis vapors during indirect heat exchange were 
also affected by sweeping gas flow rate and flow field shape and other 
factors [3]. Among them, sweeping gas flow rate was a more sensitive 
adjustment that exhibited better economy and quicker feedback time 
than water bath temperature [19]. But the recovery evolutions of py-
rolysis vapors with changing sweeping gas flow rate were seldom 
studied due to lack of dependable research methods previously. 
Furthermore, although the existing investigations summarized the 
influence of sweeping gas flow rate on bio-oil yield and composition, the 
individual impact on biomass pyrolysis or vapor condensation was not 
distinguished [6,20]. The study of Huang et al. reported that bio-oil 
yield increased first and then decreased with increasing inert gas flow 
rate in a fluidized bed reactor [21]. The suitable increase in flow rate 
decreased the residence time of pyrolysis products in the hot zone and 
avoided some secondary reactions while the extreme increase led to the 
eddy appearance in the flow field that would promote the secondary 
reactions of pyrolysis products. Therefore, for exclusively studying the 
influence of sweeping gas flow rate on condensation, the pyrolysis 
reactor should have the ability to avoid the significant effect of sweeping 
gas flow rate on biomass pyrolysis process. The previous results from our 
study indicated that the dense pile of pyrolysis feedstock generated the 
relatively saturated secondary reactions in the laboratory-scale fixed 
bed biomass pyrolysis reactor based on a horizontal tubular furnace, and 
the secondary reactions were negligibly affected by changing sweeping 
gas flow rate [22]. For developing the adjustment methods of selective 
condensation and reducing the production costs, the gap should be filled 
in the individual effect of sweeping gas on the evolution of pyrolysis 
vapors during condensation. In the present study, the novel and effective 
experimental method based on bio-oil composition inversion and func-
tion fitting was applied to investigate the effect of sweeping gas flow rate 
on the evolution of pyrolysis vapors during condensation. The lique-
faction of walnut shell pyrolysis vapors was conducted in the specific 
condenser with two flumes for segmental bio-oil recovery. Bio-oil 
organic composition was quantified by internal standard method. The 
evolution curves and heat maps of condensable components were 
described by fitting the relationship of remaining vapor proportion and 
position with Slogistic function. The visual description of biomass py-
rolysis vapors was successfully achieved without numerical simulation. 
The evolutions of pyrolysis vapors under different N2 flow rates were 
compared for the separation and purification of high value-added 
components. 
2. Materials and methods 
2.1. Materials 
The present study selected the walnut shells from Anhui Province, 
China as pyrolysis feedstock to conduct the experiment of pyrolysis and 
liquefaction. The proximate analysis of walnut shells (dry basis) was 
analyzed according to Standard GB/T 28,731–2012. The weight per-
centages of moisture, volatile, ash and fixed carbon in walnut shells were 
3.73 wt.%, 74.32 wt.%, 0.97 wt.% and 20.98 wt.%, respectively. The 
ultimate analysis of walnut shells (dry ash-free basis) was conducted 
using Elementary VarioEL-III element analyzer. The weight percentages 
of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and sulfur were 52.62 wt.%, 5.67 
wt.%, 41.26 wt.%, 0.34 wt.% and 0.11 wt.%, respectively. The values for 
fixed carbon and oxygen were calculated by difference. 
2.2. Laboratory-scale biomass pyrolysis liquefaction platform 
The pyrolysis and condensation experiment of walnut shells was 
conducted on the platform shown in Fig. 1. This laboratory-scale plat-
form was made of three systems: sweeping gas transportation system, 
fast pyrolysis system and vapor condensation system. The composition 
of three systems was introduced in our previous studies [16,22]. 
Particularly, the two flumes for bio-oil segmental recovery were added 
on the inner wall of the first condenser. The locations of two flumes were 
Fig. 1. Laboratory-scale platform for the pyrolysis and condensation experi-
ment of biomass. 
C. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Applications in Energy and Combustion Science 9 (2022) 100047
3
80 mm and 185 mm away from the vapor inlet of condenser. The reason 
for the specific positions of flumes was devoted to more distinct 
description at the beginning of fitted curve [16]. 
2.3. Experimental parameters 
The maximum load of pyrolysis reactor was about 25 g walnut shells 
for each run, but the present study chose 20.0 g ± 0.5 g walnut shells as 
pyrolysis feedstock for more sufficient heat exchange between reactor 
and biomass. The pyrolysis temperature was set at 773 K ± 10 K that was 
proved to be the most suitable temperature for the pyrolysis and 
liquefaction of walnut shells on the present platform [18]. On the 
promise of about 20 g pyrolysis feedstock and 773 K pyrolysis temper-
ature, 300 s ± 5 s was verified to adequately pyrolyze these walnut shells 
in the present reactor [18]. The effect of 300–1500 mL/min N2 flow 
rates on bio-oil composition was reported in our previous study [22]. 
The variation of sweeping gas in low flow rate range significantly 
affected the recovery of liquid products but high flow rate possibility 
damaged the air tightness of the whole device. Hence, N2 flow rates were 
selected at 100 mL/min, 300 mL/min and 500 mL/min in turn for 
analyzing the evolution of pyrolysis vapors. 
The present study was devoted to the evolution of biomass pyrolysis 
vapors with different sweeping gas flow rates in the single condensing 
field, from which the evolution could be extended in the continuous 
multi-staged condensing fields. Meanwhile, both extremely high and 
low water bath temperature tended to narrow the influential scope of 
sweeping gas flow rate, that had the potential to misunderstand the 
relevant effect mechanism. The investigation on the same platform 
indicated that the adjustment of sweeping gas flow rate showed the 
largest influential scope under 340 K water bath [22]. Thus, the present 
study set the water bath temperature at 340 K ± 1 K and the primary 
target was the evolution variation of pyrolysis vapors under 340 K water 
bath. The second condenser was set at 300 K ± 2 K (room temperature) 
for the recovery of valuable condensable components in the remaining 
vapors leaving the first condenser. For fitting evolution curve, the first 
condenser should also be set at 300 K ± 2 K, at which negligible liquid 
products were recovered in the second condenser. All liquid products in 
the first condenser could be regarded as the total condensable compo-
nents under the condensing capacity of water bath. 
2.4. Bio-oil composition qualification 
Because all bio-oil components were difficultly distinguished and 
qualified by the existing means especially large molecular oligomers and 
micro-content compounds, the typical components that could represent 
other components with similar structures and boiling points were 
preferred to be selected for investigation [13]. By comparing the values 
and features of detectable components, water, acetic acid, furfural, 
phenol, methyl cyclopentenolone (MCP), guaiacol, vanillin, 4-methyl 
guaiacol, catechol, 4-ethyl guaiacol, syringol and eugenol were 
selected for qualification [8]. The moisture in bio-oil was analyzed using 
Karl Fischer titrator. The internal standard method based on gas 
chromatography-flame ionization detector (GC-FID) was chosen to 
quantify the weight percentage (wt.%) of representative organic com-
pounds in bio-oil. 1, 2, 4, 5-tetramethylbenzene was used as internal 
standard substance. The detailed method was given in our previous in-
vestigations [17,18]. 
2.5. Function fitting of vapor evolution 
The evolution curves and heat maps of condensable components in 
biomass pyrolysis vapors with the development of condensing field were 
described through the combining method of bio-oil composition inver-
sion and Slogistic function (Eq. (1)) fitting under the assumption of 
negligible chemical reactions during condensation [18]. As calculated 
by Eq. (2), the remaining vapor proportion (RVP) of one component 
denoted the relative percentage of vaporous component to the total 
component. M0 was the total mass of one component recovered by the 
first condenser under 300 K water bath and Mi was the mass of one 
component recovered by flume i under 340 K water bath (i ≤ 3). Flume 
0 was the vapor inlet of condensing field and the theoretical value of M0 
was kept at 0, and flume 3 was the bottom of condensing field. The 
location of flume i was selected as ’x’ of Slogistic function and the 
relevant RVP was selected as ’y’ of Slogistic function, which was utilized 
to fit the vapor evolution curve of this component during condensation. 
The first derivative of fitted curve was named as recovery rate that 
represented the RVP decline per unit length of condensing field. The 
relevant parameters in the fitted equations were listed in Table 1. 
y=
a
1 + e− k(x− xc)
(1)  
Ri =
M0 −
∑
Mi
M0
× 100% (2)  
3. Results and discussions 
3.1. Apparent behaviors of biomass pyrolysis and vapor condensation 
Pyrolysis efficiency was calculated Eq. (3), which represented the 
weight percentage of total pyrolysis volatile to initial biomass feedstock 
[17]. Because of the negligible effect of sweeping gas flow on biomass 
pyrolysis in the present reactor, the similar pyrolysis efficiencies and 
feedstock masses proved that the components and proportions of py-
rolysis vapors entering the condensing field were consistent with each 
other in all experiments (Fig. 2). As the segmental flumes were installed 
in the first condenser, unavoidable bio-oil adherence was observed on 
the inner wall after the liquid products were extracted from the first 
condenser. For comparing the degree of bio-oil adherence in different 
experiments, adherent rate was defined as the weight percentage of 
adherent bio-oil to total recovered liquid products (Eq. (4)) [17]. All 
adherent rates were maintained at about 10 wt.%, and on the base of our 
previous works this result indicated that the composition quantifications 
of segmental bio-oil from different experiments could be compared with 
each other because of the small and similar adherent rates. 
Pyrolysisefficiency=
Initialwalnutshellmass − Bio− charmass
Initialwalnutshellmass
×100wt.%
(3)     
Condensing efficiency=
Bio − oil yield in one′ s condenser or flume
Pyrolysis efficiency
(5) 
Under the same pyrolysis condition, the condensable components in 
high-temperature biomass pyrolysis products were determined by 
Adherent rate=
Actual bio − oil recovery − Total bio − oil segmental recovery
Actual bio − oil recovery
× 100wt.% (4)   
C. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Applications in Energy and Combustion Science 9 (2022) 100047
4
condensing condition. Poor heat exchange only allowed the condenser 
to recover some oligomers and sugars but most of pyrolysis products 
remained vapor, such as high-temperature oil bath and spraying. 
Remarkable heat exchange could even recover CO2 and CH4 that were 
non-condensable components under water bath, such as liquid nitrogen 
bath. For comparing the distribution of condensable and non- 
condensable components in the condensing field, the condensing effi-
ciency was calculated by Eq. (5), which represented the ratio of the 
recoverable components in one flume or condenser to the total pyrolysis 
products [22]. Low condensing efficiency meant relative high propor-
tion of non-condensable components in the current part of condensing 
field. High-temperature water bath would weaken the heat exchange 
between pyrolysis vapors and condenser and inhibit the liquefaction of 
low-boiling components with poor condensing abilities. At 100 mL/min 
N2 flow rate, the total condensing efficiency of the first condenser 
increased from 0.62 to 0.69 when the water bath temperature decreased 
from 340 K to 296 K. The most increment of condensing efficiency was 
derived from the recovery improvement of the middle, which indicated 
that the recovery of high-temperature vapors in the top was hardly 
improved by decreasing water bath temperature because the limited 
space of top section was not enough to provide a relatively sufficient 
heat and mass exchange of pyrolysis vapors. 
N2 belonged to the constant non-condensable component within the 
adjustable temperature range of water bath, and the increasing N2 
would thicken the layer of non-condensable components that hindered 
the heat and mass exchange process in the condensing field. Thus, the 
total condensing efficiency of the first condenser decreased with 
increasing N2 flow rate, and meanwhile most of increasing non- 
condensable components were recovered by the second condenser 
which kept its total condensing efficiency due to the strong condensing 
capacity from low water bath temperature. As N2 flow rate was adjusted 
from 100 mL/min to 300 mL/min, the top condensing efficiency of the 
first condenser considerably decreased from 0.23 to 0.14 whereas the 
condensing efficiencies of middle and bottom section increased slightly. 
This finding indicated the condensation of top section was inhibited 
more seriously by increasing sweep gas due to the insufficient heat and 
mass exchange in the front part of condensing field. But 300 mL/min 
flow rate was difficult to completely inhibit the condensation of middle 
and bottom, and the components that failed to condense in the top were 
recovered in the middle and bottom, finally leading to the increment of 
local condensing efficiencies. When N2 flow rate was further improved 
to 500 mL/min, the top condensing efficiency no longer showed a sub-
stantial decrease and the condensing efficiencies of three sections all 
decreased about 0.1–0.2 because of the enhancing inhibition. The dis-
tribution of condensing efficiency indicated that increasing N2 flow rate 
exhibited a significant inhibition on the total recovery of liquid prod-
ucts. The flow rates lower than 300 mL/min mainly decreased the re-
covery effect of top section, and the inhibition phenomenon in the whole 
condensing field was eventually observed after the flow rate was further 
improved. 
3.2. RVP evolution of representative components at different sweeping gas 
flow rates 
3.2.1. Water 
Water was the most widespread component in the pyrolysis products 
Table 1 
Parameters in Slogistic equation used for the fitting of RVP evolution curves.   
Water Acetic acid Furfural 
100 mL/min 300 mL/min 500 mL/min 100 mL/min 300 mL/min 500 mL/min 100 mL/min 300 mL/min 500 mL/min 
a 122.9885 110.8333 118.5560 147.6805 111.1026 133.4557 1490.7540 1397.4040 148.0530 
xc 120.9526 184.9289 206.0954 118.1342 283.9441 189.8451 − 1678.5700 − 2865.2800 222.8167 
k − 0.0116 − 0.0116 − 0.0081 − 0.0062 − 0.0075 − 0.0058 − 0.0016 − 0.0009 − 0.0034 
R2 0.98950 0.99840 0.99967 0.99990 0.99750 0.99928 0.99997 0.99999 0.99631  
MCP Phenols Guaiacols 
100 mL/min 300 mL/min 500 mL/min 100 mL/min 300 mL/min 500 mL/min 100 mL/min 300 mL/min 500 mL/min 
a 102.8313 99.4656 100.1348 104.0492 2117.5090 107.5599 138.4202 212.7478 123.2504 
xc 263.7307 358.4823 298.2314 243.8220 − 4087.4400 356.2909 143.8749 − 43.5883 203.6689 
k − 0.0127 − 0.0120 − 0.0152 − 0.0110 − 0.0007 − 0.0070 − 0.0063 − 0.0028 − 0.0071 
R2 0.99889 0.97277 0.99754 0.97787 0.98292 0.99599 0.98615 0.99969 0.99968  
Fig. 2. Distribution of pyrolysis efficiency, adherent rate and condensing efficiency under different N2 flow rates.  
C. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Applications in Energy and Combustion Science 9 (2022) 100047
5
of lignocellulosic biomass. The bio-oil with high moisture was usually 
produced by traditional biomass pyrolysis liquefaction technology, 
which brought a series of difficulties for the application and refinement 
of bio-oil. Hence, the separation of water from biomass pyrolysis vapors 
during liquefaction was the important mission of selective condensation 
[23]. Water belonged to the component hard to condense among the 
detectable components and exhibited the weakest condensing ability in 
the representative components. As shown in Fig. 3, the recovery rates of 
RVP evolution curves of water all presented the tendency of rise first and 
then fall along with condensing field at three N2 flow rates. The 
consistent tendency was attributed to the poor condensing ability of 
water. The recovery of water was slowed at the vapor inlet with insuf-
ficient heat and mass exchange but increased with moving pyrolysis 
vapors in the condensing field due to the constantly accumulated 
chances of heat and mass exchange. However, the relative proportion of 
non-condensable components gradually increased as pyrolysis vapors 
moved to the middle and bottom of condensing field, which weakened 
the heat and mass exchange between water and condenser. 
When N2 flow rate increased from 100 mL/min to 300 mL/min under 
340 K water bath, the initial recovery rate of water at the vapor inlet 
decreased from 0.23%/mm to 0.12%/mm and the final RVP of water at 
the end of condenser increased from 15% to 25%. Within 0–120 mm of 
condensing field, the two curves of recovery rates approximately kept 
parallel under 100 mL/min and 300 mL/min. The maximal recovery rate 
under 100 mL/min was observed at 140 mm away from the inlet of 
condensing field, whereas the location of the maximal recovery rate was 
delayed to 180 mm under 300 mL/min. After 175 mm, the recovery rate 
under 300 mL/min began to exceed the value under 100 mL/min 
because of the lower relative proportion of constant non-condensable 
components in the condensing field. When N2 flow rate increased 
from 300 mL/min to 500 mL/min, the changeless recovery rate at the 
vapor inlet indicated that the inhibition of increasing N2 flow rate on the 
water recovery of top condensing field was approximately saturated 
under 300 mL/min, and thereby the evolution curve in the top under 
500 mL/min was coincident with the curve under 300 mL/min. After the 
mixture vapors entered the middle condensing field, the relatively 
serious inhibition on water recovery was observed under 500 mL/min 
and the maximal recovery rate was merely 0.23%/mm that was about 
0.7 times as much as the peak value under 300 mL/min. Therefore, the 
final RVP of water under 500 mL/min was 1.6 times and 2.7 times as 
much as the final values under 300 mL/min and 100 mL/min, 
respectively. 
With increasing N2 flow rate in 285 mm vertical tubular condenser, 
the inhibition of the thickening layer of non-condensable components on 
water recovery reached saturation first in the top of condensing field, 
and the main section affected by this inhibition was transferred from the 
top and middle to the middle and bottom. For this reason, the RVP 
evolution curve of water under 300 mL/min decreased more slowly than 
that under 100 mL/min before 60% of the whole condensing field, while 
the curve under 500 mL/min decreased more slowly than that under 
300 mL/min after 30% of the condensing field. At 340 K water bath 
temperature, the liquefaction and recovery of water were effectively 
reduced by promoting sweeping gas flow rate, which effectively 
decreased bio-oil moisture and achieved the online partial separation of 
water from organic compounds. 
3.2.2. Acetic acid 
Acetic acid accounted for a large proportion in the traditional py-
rolysis liquefaction products of walnut shells that profoundly affected 
the bio-oil properties as well as the separation of high value-added 
components [24]. Although acetic acid presented a slightly stronger 
condensing ability than water, the actual recovery of acetic acid in the 
first condenser was lower than that of water. This finding possibly 
resulted from the adherence of some organic components on the 
condenser wall during the bio-oil transfer process from condenser to 
liquid storage tank. As a high-content component, acetic acid showed a 
stronger adhesion and the total mass of acetic acid in the recovered 
bio-oil was lower than the actual situation, which had been reported in 
our works. Therefore, the final RVP of acetic acid (Fig. 4) remained at 
about 40% under 100 mL/min and this value increased with increasing 
N2 flow rate. Between acetic acid and water, the similar recovery rates in 
top section but the different recovery rates in middle and bottom section 
indicated that the primary adherence possibly occurred in the middle or 
bottom of condensing field. Generally, the bio-oil with low moisture was 
apt to adhere to wall because of large viscosity, but our previous study 
also found the serious adherence of bio-oil when high moisture led to the 
stratification of oil and water phases. In the present study, the moisture 
in the bio-oil recovered by the top was always maintained at 20 wt.% 
that provided good fluidity and homogeneousness for bio-oil, whereas 
the bio-oil recovered by the bottom exhibited a more visible stratifica-
tion due to the moisture higher than 30 wt.%. Thus, the main reason for 
the high final RVP of acetic acid was the more serious adherence of 
acetic acid on the bottom wall. 
As N2 flow rate increased from 100 mL/min to 300 mL/min, the 
initial recovery rate of acetic acid was less than 0.10%/mm and the 
descent speed of evolution curve was slowed significantly. Although the 
total heat exchange of pyrolysis vapors increased with their movement 
in the condensing field, the maximal recovery rate of acetic acid merely 
reached to 0.21%/mm at the end of condenser, which was still less than 
the maximal recovery rate in the middle of condensing field under 100 
Fig. 3. Evolution curves and heat maps of water in biomass pyrolysis vapors during condensation.  
C. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Applications in Energy and Combustion Science 9 (2022) 100047
6
mL/min. After the mixture vapors went through the first condenser 
under 300 mL/min, 55% of acetic acid remained vapor that was 1.4 
times as much as the final RVP of acetic acid under 100 mL/min. 
Different from water, however, the RVP evolution curve of acetic acid 
was not further slowed but improved under 500 mL/min, and the initial 
recovery rate increased to 0.15%/mm. This phenomenon was because 
the disturbance of streamline was accelerated by 500 mL/min N2, thus 
promoting the molecular collisions in pyrolysis vapors and improving 
the efficiency of heat and mass exchange during condensation. This 
improvement was relatively small and showed little effect on water with 
the weakest condensing ability, but the organic components with 
stronger condensing abilities than water could be affected effectively. 
Since the condensing ability of acetic acid was slightly higher than that 
of water, the final RVP of acetic acid under 500 mL/min only decreased 
about 5% from the final value under 300 mL/min. 
The recovery of acetic acid would be inhibited by increasing 
sweeping gas flow rate, but the recovery of acetic acid under the con-
dition of large flow rate was improved since the increasing disturbance 
of streamline promoted the intensification of heat and mass exchange of 
pyrolysis vapors. Overall, due to the relatively weak condensing ability, 
the total recovery of acetic acid under 500 mL/min successfully 
decreased about 10% in comparison with the result under 100 mL/min. 
Increasing N2 flow rate to 500 mL/min could still be regarded as an 
effective method for the separation of acetic acid from pyrolysis vapors. 
3.2.3. Furfural 
As listed in Table 2, the total content of water and acetic acid was far 
higher than the total content of other organic compounds, which 
demonstrated that water and acetic acid belonged to high-proportion 
components while other detectable compounds belonged to low- 
proportion or trace-proportion components in walnut shell pyrolysis 
vapors. The comparison for evolution mechanisms was impractical be-
tween high-proportion and low-proportion components because of the 
considerable difference in their heat and mass exchange methods. 
Furfural was a component with weak condensing ability in the detect-
able low-proportion components. As the water bath temperature of the 
first condenser was set at 340 K, the final RVP of furfural in Fig. 5 was 
still more than 65% under 100 mL/min N2 flow rate despite the mac-
roscopical remarkable recovery of pyrolysis vapors. The high RVP of 
furfural indicated the recovery of furfural was considerably incomplete 
because of its weak condensing ability. 
Under 100 mL/min, the recovery rate of furfural was 0.15%/mm at 
the vapor inlet but it did not exhibit an upward tendency with the 
movement of pyrolysis vapors in the condensing field. This result 
implied that the furfural recovery was not improved during the devel-
opment of the total heat and mass exchange of mixture vapors possibly 
due to the existence of other factor affecting the condensation of furfural 
during indirect heat exchange rather than condensing ability. Previous 
investigation proved that furfural would present higher solubility in the 
liquid containing abundant acetic acid [25]. In the present study, the 
higher initial recovery rate of acetic acid promoted the initial recovery 
rate of furfural under 100 mL/min because of a larger proportion of 
acetic acid in walnut shell pyrolysis vapors and bio-oil. As the pyrolysis 
vapors was moving in the condensing field, the recovery rate of furfural 
decreased slightly with increasing relative proportion of 
non-condensable components. When N2 flow rate increased to 300 
mL/min, the initial recovery rate of furfural also decreased to 
0.08%/mm with the substantial reduction of the initial recovery rate of 
acetic acid. The increasing proportion of non-condensable components 
inhibited the furfural recovery at the end of condensing field despite the 
high recovery rates of acetic acid. Thus, the recovery rate of furfural also 
showed a slightly downward tendency under 300 mL/min. As N2 flow 
rate was set as 500 mL/min, the furfural recovery was significantly 
improved by the increasing recovery rate of acetic acid and the 
enhancing heat and mass exchange caused by high-frequency distur-
bance. The final RVP of furfural under 500 mL/min was consistent with 
Fig. 4. Evolution curves and heat maps of acetic acid in biomass pyrolysis vapors during condensation.
Applications in Energy and Combustion Science 9 (2022) 100047
7
that under 100 mL/min. 
Under the three N2 flow rates, the recovery rates of furfural evolution 
curves all exhibited narrow variations and the maximal recovery pro-
portion of furfural was no more than 35%. As a high value-added 
component, furfural needed to be recovered more adequately. Signifi-
cantly, 500 mL/min N2 flow rate effectively inhibited the water recovery 
and improved the furfural recovery to the result achieved by 100 mL/ 
min, which provided convenience for the separation and purification of 
furfural. Therefore, the small decline of water bath temperature for the 
condenser used to enrich furfural could further promote the furfural 
recovery with maintaining 500 mL/min N2 flow rate. Meanwhile, a 
condenser at higher water bath temperature for separating the compo-
nents with strong condensing abilities could be set in front of the 
condenser used to enrich furfural, which would also reduce the 
complexity of purifying furfural from bio-oil. 
3.2.4. MCP 
MCP was universally applied in food production and processing as a 
flavoring agent, and it presented the properties of olefin, carbonyl and 
hydroxyl together [26]. Hence, the condensing evolution mechanism of 
MCP was valuable to be studied despite the common content of MCP less 
than 1 wt.% in bio-oil (Fig. 6). According to the boiling point distribu-
tion of detectable components at normal atmosphere, MCP belonged to 
the component with middle condensing ability in all discussed 
components and exhibited a stronger condensing ability than furfural. 
The final RVP value of MCP was higher than that of furfural under each 
N2 flow rate. However, the initial recovery rate of MCP was no more 
than 0.04%/mm that was merely approximate to the half of the minimal 
initial recovery rate of furfural. This finding was probably because the 
trace-proportion MCP in walnut shell pyrolysis vapors get little oppor-
tunity for heat and mass exchange in the top of condenser where the 
pyrolysis vapors contained abundant condensable components under 
the present condition of condensation. After the vapors moved to the 
middle of condensing field, the recovery rates of high-proportion com-
ponents began to decrease whereas MCP exhibited a continuous increase 
in recovery rate because it was weakly affected by increasing 
non-condensable proportion by virtue of stronger condensing ability. 
Under 100 mL/min, the recovery rate of MCP was about 0.04%/mm 
at the vapor inlet and gradually increased along with condensing field 
and reached the peak value of 0.32%/mm at the end of condensing field. 
The recovery proportions of MCP were 5%, 20% and 30% in the top, 
middle and bottom of condenser, respectively. As N2 flow rate was 
improved to 300 mL/min, the initial recovery rate of MCP decreased to 
0.015%/mm and the peak value of recovery rate decreased to 0.24%/ 
mm due to the influence of increasing constant non-condensable pro-
portion. In comparison with the result under 100 mL/min, the recovery 
proportions of MCP in the three sections all decreased by about half 
under 300 mL/min and the final RVP of MCP increased from 45% to 
Fig. 5. Evolution curves and heat maps of furfural in biomass pyrolysis vapors during condensation.  
Fig. 6. Evolution curves and heat maps of MCP in biomass pyrolysis vapors during condensation.  
C. Wang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Applications in Energy and Combustion Science 9 (2022) 100047
8
70%. After the N2 flow rate was further improved, the initial recovery 
rate was changeless but the ascensional range of recovery rate under 
500 mL/min was far broader than that under 300 mL/min. The endmost 
recovery rate was 1.5 times as much as the value under 300 mL/min, 
which indicated that the improvement effect of 500 mL/min N2 flow 
rate on MCP recovery was concentrated at the end of condensing field. 
As described in the evolution curves of MCP, the recovery proportions of 
top and middle varied negligibly but the bottom doubled the recovery 
proportion when N2 flow rate increased from 300 mL/min to 500 mL/ 
min. 
The evolution curves of MCP revealed that the condensing priority of 
trace-proportion component was lower than that of high-proportion 
component in the condensing field under 340 K water bath but the 
trace-proportion component with stronger condensing ability was still 
recovered effectively in the bottom of condenser. Likewise, the high- 
frequency disturbance successfully improved the recovery of MCP 
under 500 mL/min flow rate. Nevertheless, 340 K water bath tempera-
ture showed a good recovery effect on water and specially the final RVP 
of water was less than 20% under 100 mL/min. If the recovery of MCP 
was required to be further strengthened, especially the improvement of 
its initial recovery rate, the recovery effect of condenser on high- 
proportion components with poor condensing abilities must be 
reduced. An appropriate increase in the water bath temperature outside 
the condensing field would effectively inhibit the recovery of high- 
proportion components and provide more opportunities for the heat 
and mass exchange of trace-proportion components with strong 
condensing abilities. 
3.2.5. Phenol and catechol 
Generally, walnut shells contained more than 50 wt. % lignin, and 
large amounts of phenolic compounds and pyrolytic oligomers were 
generated during the pyrolysis of abundant lignin [27]. As representa-
tive small-molecule phenolic compounds, the phenol and catechol 
(phenols) in walnut shell pyrolysis vapors were essential ingredients for 
medicine and chemical. At normal atmosphere, the boiling points of 
phenols were higher than that of furfural and the pure phenols showed 
stronger condensing abilities. Meanwhile, phenol or catechol also 
belonged to the trace-proportion component in walnut shell pyrolysis 
vapors. Therefore, the evolution curves for the RVP and recovery rate of 
phenols were consistent with those of MCP under 100 mL/min. The final 
RVP of phenols in Fig. 7 was slightly lower than that of MCP in 340 K 
condensing field, which proved phenols presented a stronger total 
condensing ability. In the composition of phenols, phenol exhibited a 
weaker condensing ability than MCP whereas the condensing ability of 
catechol was stronger than that of MCP. The above results indicated 
catechol dominated the total condensing ability of phenols under the 
present condition of condensation. 
However, the evolution curve of phenols varied differently from MCP 
after N2 flow rate increased. Under 300 mL/min, the recovery rate of 
phenols changed negligibly at the vapor inlet but decreased with the 
movement of pyrolysis vapors, and thereby the final RVP of phenols 
increased from 40 to 80%. This phenomenon proved that the extra in-
hibition effect on the recovery of phenols existed in the middle and 
bottom of condensing field under 300 mL/min. The investigation of 
Busca et al. reported that the azeotrope with weaker condensing ability 
was generated by the combination of water and phenol-structure com-
pound [28]. The significant heat and mass exchange under 100 mL/min 
led to the sufficient recovery of water, phenols and their azeotrope 
together, while the decreasing heat and mass exchange under 300 
mL/min was insufficient to recover the phenols because the generation 
of azeotrope was improved with ascending water in the mixture vapors. 
When N2 flow rate was 500 mL/min, high-frequency disturbance pro-
moted the recovery of phenols and azeotrope and improved the recovery 
rate of phenols in the bottom of condenser. At the end of condensing 
field, the recovery rate of phenols under 500 mL/min was 3 times as 
much as that under 300 mL/min and the final RVP of phenols decreased 
from 80% to 65%. 
The evolution of phenols indicated that azeotropy also affected the 
competitive liquefaction process of biomass pyrolysis components based 
on their condensing abilities. The desired recovery of high-boiling 
component demanded to strength the heat and mass exchange be-
tween condenser and pyrolysis vapors when the target high-boiling 
component and low-boiling component formed the azeotrope with 
weaker condensing ability. The recovery under 100 mL/min was seldom 
influenced by azeotrope because of the sufficient condensing recovery of 
the overall pyrolysis vapors, but increasing azeotrope and decreasing 
heat and mass exchange synergistically decreased the recovery of target 
component under 300 mL/min. Fortunately, 500 mL/min sweeping gas 
flow rate increased the disturbance of condensing field and improved 
the recovery of azeotrope. 
3.2.6. Guaiacol and its derivatives 
Guaiacol and its derivatives (guaiacols containing 4-methyl guaiacol, 
4-ethyl guaiacol, eugenol, syringol and vanillin) were high-boiling and 
large-molecule phenolic compounds in the detectable components of 
walnut shell pyrolysis vapors. As important fine chemical intermediates 
guaiacols could be utilized to synthesize flavor and medicine [29–31]. 
The content of each component of guaiacols was approximate to or more 
than 1 wt.% in all segmental bio-oil and the total content of detectable 
guaiacols was always approximate to or more than 5 wt.%. Hence, 
Fig. 7. Evolution curves and heat maps of phenols in biomass pyrolysis vapors during condensation.  
C. Wang et al.
Applications in Energy and Combustion Science 9 (2022) 100047
9
guaiacols belonged to the low-proportion component in the pyrolysis 
vapors. The boiling points of guaiacols ranked first in the discussed 
components and thereby guaiacols presented considerably strong 
condensing abilities. In Fig. 8, the recovery rate of guaiacols under 100 
mL/min was 0.18%/mm at the vapor inlet and exhibited a tendency of 
rising first and then falling along with condensing field. But the signif-
icant recovery of guaiacols at the vapor inlet limited the ascensional 
range of recovery rate because of their stronger condensing abilities and 
larger proportions in pyrolysis vapors than trace-proportion MCP and 
phenols. 
When N2 flow rate increased to 300 mL/min, the recovery rate of 
guaiacols decreased to 0.15%/mm at the vapor inlet and reached the 
peak value in the top of condensing field. As the relative proportion of 
non-condensable components increased in the condensing field, the re-
covery rate slightly decreased to 0.12%/mm at the end of condenser. 
The final RVP of guaiacols increased from 40% to 60%, but which was 
still higher than the final values of furfural, MCP and phenols under 300 
mL/min because of the strong condensing abilities. Under 500 mL/min, 
the initial recovery rate decreased in comparison with that under 300 
mL/min but the enhancing disturbance promoted the recovery of 
guaiacols in the middle and bottom of condensing field. The recovery 
rate reached the peak value of 0.21%/mm at 200 mm away from the 
vapor inlet under 500 mL/min whereas the same peak value occurred at 
150 mm under 100 mL/min. The adjacent positions of peak value 
indicated that the recovery effect of condensing field on guaiacols under 
500 mL/min was consistent with that under 100 mL/min. The two re-
covery curves of guaiacols under 100 mL/min and 500 mL/min pri-
marily kept parallel in middle and bottom sections and the final RVP 
decreased to 45% under 500 mL/min. 
Guaiacols presented the strong resistance to the inhibition of heat 
and mass exchange. At 340 K water bath temperature, the recovery rates 
of guaiacols with sufficient heat and mass exchange were maintained 
between 0.18 and 0.21%/mm under 100 mL/min while the decreasing 
recovery rates with poor heat and mass exchange were still maintained 
between 0.12 and 0.15%/mm under 300 mL/min. However, the re-
covery rate showed a significant upward tendency along with 
condensing field when 500 mL/min N2 flow rate improved the 
condensation of pyrolysis vapors in the middle and bottom sections. The 
evolution results of guaiacols indicated that the heat and mass exchange 
enhancement under 500 mL/min could completely achieve the 
remarkable recovery effect of guaiacols, and simultaneously separate 
20% of water and 10% of acetic acid from the recovered liquid products. 
4. Conclusion 
The suitable increment of N2 flow rate inhibited bio-oil moisture and 
enriched the contents of organic compounds through increasing the 
high-frequency disturbance of condensing field. The incremental 
amount was determined by the property of condensable component. 
When N2 flow rate increased from 300 mL/min to 500 mL/min, the final 
remaining vapor proportion of acetic acid with poor condensing ability 
only decreased from 55% to 50% while that of guaiacol and its de-
rivatives with strong condensing abilities decreased from 60% to 45%. 
Despite poor condensing ability furfural exhibited a significant recovery 
at the vapor inlet due to the great solubility of furfural in high-content 
acetic acid. The recovery of phenol and catechol was considerably 
inhibited in the middle and bottom of condensing field because of the 
azeotrope formation between water and phenol-structure compounds. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgement 
This work was supported by National Key Research and Develop-
ment Program of China (2018YFB1501404).