It is becoming more difficult to protect the authentication of our data in today's world of smart living. On the one
hand, we are able to live in smart homes and smart cities with ease. Even if we use the most complicated
passwords, we can't be sure that the Internet of Things and the Internet of Everything are safe. One way to make
sure people and things are safe is to use Multi-Factor Authentication. Also, a big and complicated system needs
more efficient and robust solutions for real, and strong, security, so this is important. There are a lot of smart ways
to solve problems today. For this reason, the internet of things is being used in every possible field or application.
This new ecosystem, which is called Cyber Physical Systems, was built by IoTs. Cyber-Physical Systems use
computing, communication, and control to make new technology or the next generation of engineered systems. In
the last decade, there has been a lot of work done on cyber physical systems that we didn't expect. There have
been a lot of threats, challenges, and important issues in the last decade. We have a big problem with the security
of CPS because the basic blocks used to make them are very different. Even if we're talking about natural gas
systems or transportation systems or other automated systems, they all have something to do with CPS, no matter
what. These days, CPSs systems are used for energy, transportation, the environment, and health care, among
other things. This article talks about a number of problems that need to be solved by researchers and scientists
(working related to respective area, i.e., CPS). As a result, this article also talks about a partial survey of important
research issues, and an overview of several research projects that have been done in the last decade by a number
of different people to improve CPS.1. Introduction
It's very important to be safe in today's world of smart devices and
smart environments, where almost all of the devices are connected to the
internet. People who make their devices more secure also make them
more efficient. It doesn't matter if researchers work for an organisation or
work on their own personal data; security is important to all of us.
Governments all over the world are passing new laws like the General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [1] to stop people from doing illegal
things and to help people protect their own information. But, to keep data
safe over a control system or a smart device, we need effective crypto-
graphic methods. To be honest, we have to admit that there is no best
way to protect ourselves. Even though encryption is a better way to keep
communications safe, it requires that both the encryption key and the
decryption key be kept in a safe place. Multi Factor Authentication (MFA)
[2] is becoming more and more common as a way to protect their data
from hackers. The best way to avoid an attack is to figure out how tota Science, Vellore Institute of Te
.K. Tyagi), nsreenath@pec.edu (N
1 December 2021; Accepted 21 D
ier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Commupredict when one is going to happen. CPS is an intelligent computerised
system that uses controlled mechanisms and different algorithms to
connect software and hardware parts so that it can work and show a
variety of ways and approaches.
This is how it works now: CPS is used in a lot of different things like
medical devices or transportation, and it's becoming more important as
time goes on. Security is the main problem with the CPS system. To come
up with a way to make these systems more secure in an efficient way is
the biggest problem (but not rigid, fixed to one form of system). In Refs.
[3,] many works have been done to make cyber-physical systems more
secure. An authentication framework for a machine-to-machine
communication in CPS has been talked about in Ref. [4].
Identity-based encryption and the AES (Advanced Encryption Standard)
have been mixed together in this framework of encryption. There are
more computer attacks on critical infrastructures and industrial control
systems, and the core of these systems, known as CPS, is becoming more
vulnerable to these. In this article, we talked about a lot of things thatchnology, Chennai, 600127, Tamilnadu, India.
. Sreenath).
ecember 2021
nications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
A.K. Tyagi, N. Sreenath Internet of Things and Cyber-Physical Systems 1 (2021) 22–33people are worried about when it comes to the security of CPS. So, in the
organisation part, we talked about how this work would go and how it
would be done (in the last of this section). This isn't all: There are a lot of
different types of CPSs that we use in our daily lives, like in the following:
 Industrial Control System Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS)
 Smart Grid CPS
 Medical CPS
 Smart Vehicles/Automotive CPS
 Household CPS
 Aerospace CPS
 Defence CPS1.1. Medical Cyber-Physical Systems
Medical Cyber Physical System (MCPS) refers to advanced medical
technologies that use sophisticated embedded systems and network
communication to monitor and control the physical dynamics of patient
bodies, such as proton therapy machines, electro-anatomic mapping and
intervention, bio-compatible and implantable devices, and robotic
prosthetics. These technologies can be used to monitor and control the
physical dynamics of patients. These tools can have a big effect on a
patient's health if they're not used correctly. It's very important to make
sure that all of the interactions are safe and accurate, but it can be very
hard to do because of how complicated they are. Modeling and efficient
simulation of the patient's body will play a big role in designing and
testing Medical CPS as well as in designing and testing customised
treatment plans. Then, in [5,6] we show that simulation speeds can be
achieved in real time (for complex spatial patterns that could be linked to
heart arrhythmias) with a standard desktop with GPU technology. Soon,
hospitals will be able to run real-time simulations of organs. This will
help people use model-based clinical diagnostics and treatment planning
without needing supercomputers.
1.2. Cyber physical systems – in general
For the physical environment to work correctly and better, it is
important to keep an eye on the behaviour of physical processes and take
actions that could change their behaviour, which is why CPS was built.
There are twomain parts to CPS: one is the physical process and the other
is the cyber system, both of which work together. With more interaction
between these two parts, the impact of security threats in the cyber
system on the physical system also rises, which makes it more important
to keep them safe. In CPS, many attacks have been stopped over the last
decade. There was a lot of damage done to Iran's nuclear facilities by the
Stuxnet worm attack in 2010 [18]. Also in the last few years, some at-
tackers or hackers have tried to make the systems of the United States,
like air traffic control mission-support systems, useless. ‘Carshark’ was a
name for a piece of software that some hackers used to be able to kill a
car's engine from afar in 2010. It could also stop the car from stopping. If
the ECUs communicate with each other, it could make the measuring
instruments give out false readings. For example, it could look at how the
ECUs communicate with each other and make false data packets so that
hackers could do bad things. Also in the past, attackers/hackers have
made changes to Siemen's plant-control system with a virus, worm, or
patch. Some hackers are now able to get into medical devices that are
implanted in people's bodies and work with wireless communications or
Android apps. Several types of security flaws are found in most
cyber-physical systems, such as digital power grids, smart transportation
systems, medical systems, and defence systems.
Future CPSs don't just have physical parts. They also have chemical
and biological parts, where information can be found in different sub-
stances and forms (information exists on multiple spatial and time
scales). Multi-Scale Informatics (MSI) is thought to be able to get infor-
mation from these subsystems. It can also figure out how information23moves, and then connect subsystems together in a physical, syntactic,
semantic, and operative way, so that they can work together better. MSI
could be an important part of information theory, but it still needs a lot of
people to use it and a lot of research. Complexity of technology makes it
more difficult to keep new systems (technology) safe, but it also makes it
more important to keep them safe. Privacy isn't a concern here (or large
networking). It takes a lot of devices to make something complicated like
a CPS or the Internet of Things. They connect together and change their
structure often. As long as anyone can use the system and then leave the
system after they've used it, new systems could be added to these types of
systems. But, when users communicate with each other in CPSs, security
is a must-have thing to have. So, the security architecture must be able to
change with these kinds of changes and be able to give users safe and
secure services.
Thus, the rest of this paper is organised as shown in Fig. 1: Section 2
starts with background work, which is a list of all the work that has been
done by different researchers and scientists over the last decade to
improve CPS (industrial, control systems, medical devices, smart Vehi-
cles etc.). Section 3 has also talked about security components, re-
quirements, or parameters. This is where they are explained. Section 4
talks about a number of critical threats that have been found in CPSs.
Many problems with CPSs (like industrial, control systems, medical de-
vices and smart cars) are also talked about in the fifth section of the text.
Section 6 is the best part of this article because it talks about challenges
and opportunities in medical cyber physical systems. Somemore efficient
solutions have been suggested, andmore about them in Section 7. Section
8 talks about (lists) a number of open issues that have been found in CPSs
that need to be addressed soon. Section 9 gives future researchers in CPSs
a chance to work on a number of important issues and problems (raised in
CPSs). In the end, this work comes to an end in section 10 with a short
summary. In the end, Table 1 tells about the list of abbreviations used in
this work.
2. Background
Cyber Physical Systems (CPSs) are those IT systems which are intro-
duced in the applications of physical world. In these systems, sensors and
actuators are already ingrained. The progress in ICTs results into more
communication among cyber world and physical world which in turn
increases the inter communication among physical processes.
2.1. Cyber physical systems – in real world
CPSs are used as the new generation of embedded control system that
can monitor and control the physical world. Many applications like en-
ergy, transportation and healthcare are being increasingly dependent on
CPSs. It depends on the technology being used as a very relevant and
symbolic CPS is the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition system [9]
(SCADA) (used in CIs such as smart grids and ICSs), wearable and
ImplantableMedical Devices (IMDs) (used inmedical care). Hence, it will
be a herculean task to list out all the variations of CPSs, but in this work
we are providing four representative applications of CPS and important
details of these four applications are discussed in brief as:
a) Industrial Control Systems (ICS): ICS (or SCADA or distributed control
systems) is the control system that enhances the control and pro-
duction while monitoring different industries such as the nuclear
plants, water and sewage systems, and irrigation systems. In ICS, we
have different controllers such as PLC (Programmable Logic
Controller). This device has variety of capabilities that can collabo-
rate to reach a number of desired results. Sensors and actuators are
being used to connect this device to the physical world. Both the
wireless and wired communication capacities are configured in this
system that can be used based on the nature of surroundings. Further,
it can monitor and control the operations in a control centre by
connecting it to PC systems.
Fig. 1. Key organisation of the Work.
Table 1
List of abbreviations used.
Short forms List of Abbreviations
CPS Cyber Physical System
SCADA Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
AES Advanced Encryption Standard
MCPS Medical Cyber Physical System
GPU Graphics processing unit
ECU Engine control unit
ICT Information and Communications Technology,
IT Information Technology
MSI Microsatellite instability
MMR Mismatch repair
SMD Surface-mount technology
ICS Industrial control systems
PLC Programmable Logic Controller
PCA Principal component analysis
IDS Intrusion detection system
IPS Intrusion prevention system
VPN Virtual private network
CIA Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability
IoT Intent of Things
AMI Advanced Metering Infrastructure
DoS Denial of Service
FDI False Data Injection
CAN Campus Area Network
IMD Implantable Medical Devices
V2V Vehicle to Vehicle
V2I Vehicle to Infrastructure
MAP Mean Arterial Pressure
NIST National Institute of Standards and Technology
MDCF Medical Device Coordination Framework
A.K. Tyagi, N. Sreenath Internet of Things and Cyber-Physical Systems 1 (2021) 22–33b) Smart Grid Systems: Although power grid is being used for decades,
smart grid is the next generation grid for generating electricity with
advanced functionalities. At local level, it is economically and envi-
ronmentally feasible by allowing the consumer to have better control24over their usage of energy. While at the national level, it enhances the
control over emission, global load balancing and saves the energy.
c) Medical Devices: Cyber and physical capabilities have been incor-
porated to improvise medical devices with an aim to deliver better
health care services. These medical devices are designed to serve the
patients by being implanted inside the patient's body (IMD's [7,8,10])
or worn by them in the form of wearable devices. Such devices are
smart and they have wireless capabilities to communicate with other
devices. This communication is being provided by programmer,
require for updating and reconfiguring the devices. Wearable device
is more helpful in tracking minor activities of patients.
d) Smart Vehicles: Smart Vehicles are vehicles that are more environ-
mentally friendly, more fuel-efficient, safer, and have improved us-
ability and convenience. Through depending on a number of 50–70
networked computers, called Electronic Control Units (ECUs), these
developments were made possible. ECUs [11] are responsible for
monitoring and regulating different functions such as engine emission
control, brake control, entertainment (radio and multimedia players)
and comfort features (cruise control and opening and closing of
windows). Such innovations are most needed technology in current
era scenario (i.e., to reduce traffic congestion, accidents, etc., over the
road/region).2.2. Trends in medical cyber physical system (MCPS)
As we have discussed about wearable devices, and IMDs, now we
discuss importance of CPSs in medical applications, i.e., medical devices
that are software-intensive, such as infusion pumps, ventilators and pa-
tient monitoring. These medical devices are attracting many people to
make their life convenient and easier to life (via identifying causes of
diseases or curing diseases). However, having a major transformation to
these devices creates new challenges in the respective application (also
providing/opening new opportunities for the research community). The
main trends in medical devices can be summarized as follows:
A.K. Tyagi, N. Sreenath Internet of Things and Cyber-Physical Systems 1 (2021) 22–33a) New software-enabled functionality: Via software-based design (of
medical device systems), for example, robotic surgery, proton therapy
treatment, new technology is introduced in medical devices using
embedded system principles. This (robotic surgery) requires high-
resolution images and haptic feedback to be processed in real time.
Whereas, it is one of the most technology-intensive treatments (pro-
ton therapy treatment) and involves one of the largest networks of
medical devices. This delivers specific doses of radiation to patients
with cancer, providing precise instructions from a cyclotron for pa-
tients for the treatment of the proton beam. The bigger problem is
that the same beam is distributed to different patient locations and
has to be moved from location to location, opening up the possibility
of interference with beam scheduling and beaming. Several re-
searchers have been studying the security of proton therapy machines
in the previous decade, but mostly their research focuses only on one
device, i.e., faces emergency shutdown. Proper analysis and evalua-
tion of such large and complex structures is therefore one of the major
challenges facing manufacturers/industry of medical devices.
b) Increased connectivity of medical devices: Medical devices are
increasingly relying on software in the current era, i.e., they are
equipped with network interfaces. Such integrated medical devices
allow a decentralized network of medical devices that must be
properly designed and tested in order to perform some function or
look like patients (cure diseases). These medical devices are used for
patient tracking and for integration with Electronic Health Records
(EHR) to store patient data through local connection of individual
devices to integrated patient monitoring or remote monitoring in a
tele-ICU setting [12]. Capabilities of such medical devices in the
current scenario are limited in scope and regulation by device man-
ufacturers or healthcare practitioners, resulting in increased patient
safety and new treatment procedures. Medical Device Plug-and-Play
(MD PnP) Interoperability initiative [13] is an initiative that offers
an open standard system for safe and scalable medical device inter-
connectivity, as well as enhancing patient safety and efficiency in
health care.
c) Physiologically closed-loop systems: In general, many clinics have a
caregiver to monitor the system (or more than one). An anaesthesi-
ologist, for example, controls a patient's sedation during a procedure
and determines when to take action to change the sedative stream.
Yet, in the medical community, there is a concern that such depen-
dence on “person in the loop” could compromise patient safety. A
vital warning sign may be ignored by caregivers who are often
overworked and function under extreme time pressure. Nurses may
not be in a position to handle multiple patients at a time, but they can
handle a machine that will be a great relief for the caregiver and can
improve patient care and health. Although a computer (machine) can
never completely replace the caregiver (in feeling/emotions), it can
minimize the workload substantially, calling attention to the care-
giver only when something out of the ordinary happens. Scenarios
based on closed-loop physiological regulation have been used for
some time in the medical device industry. Patient-Controlled Anal-
gesia (PCA) [14] is a clinical-based condition benefiting from the
approach of the closed loop. PCA infusion pumps are commonly used
to supply opioids, i.e., after surgery, for pain management. PCA
pumps give a button to the patient to ask for a dose when they decide
they want it instead of using a schedule provided by a caregiver.
A properly configured PCA device should not allow overdose as it is
designed with limits on how many doses it will produce, regardless of
how often the button is pressed. This safety mechanism, however, is not
enough to cover all patients' requirements. Many patients may experi-
ence overdoses if the pump is mis-programmed, if the pump developer
overestimates a patient's maximum dose, if the incorrect amount of the
drug is loaded into the device, or if someone other than the patient is
pressing the button (PCA-by proxy), among other reasons. PCA infusion
pumps are currently involved in a wide range of adverse events, and25proven protections such as drug libraries and programmable thresholds
are not sufficient to resolve all the clinical practice scenarios [15].
Therefore, in order to solve such cases, we needed efficient medical de-
vices to look at patients in the near future (also devices needed to
calculate the level of the drug in the body of the patient).
d) Continuous Monitoring and Care: Due to the high cost of in-hospital
care, there has been a growing interest in exploring alternatives
such as home care, assisted living, telemedicine, and supervision of
sports activities. Mobile tracking and home monitoring of vital signs
and physical activity make it possible to assess safety at all times
remotely.
Also, several medical devices are in tend to measure heart rate,
breathing rate, blood-sugar level, stress level, and skin temperature (of a
patient/person). Nonetheless, with no real-time diagnostic capabilities,
these tools’ function/operate in store-and-forward mode. Closed-loop
technology in physiology will allow real-time clinical assessment of
vital signs and will require constant care.
2.3. Cyber security vs network security vs information security
Cyber-security is a part of information security, which is a bigger part.
Cyber security is used to protect an organization's networks, computers,
and data from unauthorised digital access, attack, or damage by using a
wide range of processes, technologies, and practises. InfoSec makes sure
that both physical and digital information is safe from being accessed,
used, disclosed, disturbed, altered, reviewed, recorded, or destroyed. The
goal of InfoSec is to keep data safe in any form, while cyber-security only
protects digital data. As a result, network security's job is to protect the IT
infrastructure of the company from all kinds of cyber threats like viruses,
worms, and Trojan horses as well as hacker attacks, denial of service
attacks, spyware, and a lot of other attacks. A network security frame-
work has many parts that work together to make us more secure. Most
networks have firewalls, anti-virus software, intrusion detection and
prevention systems (IDS/IPS), and Virtual Private Networks (VPN) to
keep things safe.
This section talks about work done on cyber physical systems, such as
trends and work done in the last decade (to make CPS or MCPS more
secure) in great detail. Also, this section talks about the differences be-
tween cyber, information, and network security in a clear way. Now, in
the next section, we'll talk about the security needed in CPSs, as well as
the difference between CPS security and other systems' security, like in a
company.
3. Security in Cyber Physical Systems (CPSs)
In this paragraph, we give several examples of how important safety is
in CPS. Security control usually refers to things like cryptography, access
control, detection of intrusion, and a lot of other things (used in IT sys-
tems). They are very important when it comes to protecting the infra-
structure of an ICT. Cyber physical systems that aren't going to make
mistakes in the near future are going to be needed a lot. This is because
there are going to be a lot of attacks like this in the future. These are some
of the security requirements for different uses of CPSs:
 Based on the case, not having or not having enough protection in the
CPS could be very bad. For example, if the safety of CPS used in a
nuclear plant has been harmed, the result could be a threat to the
whole world. There was an attack on Iran's nuclear power plants
called Stuxnet in 2010. There are also a lot of old systems in big in-
dustrial control systems. This is also true. Many people have been
working on things like “lightweight cryptographic mechanisms” (to
keep data safe, accessible, and secure) over the last decade. But there
is still a lot of work to be done in all of them. Keep in mind that having
some level of security is better than having no security at all. Security
A.K. Tyagi, N. Sreenath Internet of Things and Cyber-Physical Systems 1 (2021) 22–33is an important part of an ICS, and it needs a lot of help from the
research community.
 Consumers could lose service and the utility company could lose
money if smart grid security is breached, which could happen. Smart
grids can also be attacked from afar, which could cause a lot of people
to lose power. There could be health and safety consequences if there
are power or energy outages, such as malfunctions of medical ma-
chines, data loss at data centres, and even an increase in crime rates
[16]. So, security is an important part of Smart Grid CPSs (also to
protect user information in systems).
 Patients' safety could be at risk if wearable devices and IMDs that are
targeted by hackers are not properly protected. Goals for safety and
privacy (CIA: Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability): licenced
agencies should be able to access and use accurate data; they should
also be able to recognise and customise devices, upgrade code, and
make sure that devices are available. So, security in a medical app is
very important to protect the user's or patient's personal information.
 Manufacturers of cars are trying to come up with new technologies
that will make their cars more useable and comfortable for their
customers. Vehicles are usually built to be safe, but this may not be
the most important thing to think about when researchers designing
them. Security protects the ability of the car to run in non-violent
accidents. Safety, on the other hand, was not part of the design, but
an extra feature. The new features of the car need to communicate
wirelessly and physically affect parts. Such two technologies are used
in smart cars to deal with most security flaws or attacks. We need safe
and effective ways to fight back against these attacks.
For critical control systems or CPSs to be properly protected, the
technology that underlies them must meet certain performance stan-
dards. This way, well-tested safety mechanisms and standards can be
used.
3.1. Security parameters
There are a lot of factors that are used when it comes to CPSs in order
to make sure that the systems they protect are safe enough (real world
applications). Our security rule must keep CPSs safe from any kind of
threat or attack.
It has become more and more clear in recent years that the safety of
control systems has become a very important part. The most common
difference between control systems and IT protection is that control
systems don't need to be patched or updated. For example, it may take
months to figure out how to take a computer offline for an upgrade. It's
not worth it to stop an industrial computer to install new security patches
all the time. During a software update on March 7, 2008, a device used to
keep track of chemical and diagnostic information from the plant's
business network started up again. This caused a nuclear power plant to
be shut down by accident. There was no data to show that there was a
drop in water reservoirs, which meant that there was not enoughwater to
keep nuclear fuel rods cool. The computer restarted, which caused this
mistake. It is important for control systems to make decisions on their
own, but they also need to make them in real time (another control
system property). As a security issue, availability has been looked at a lot.
In real time, though, it has a stricter operating environment than most
other IT systems.
This section talks about a number of security parameters and re-
quirements for security in CPSs, so this is the last part (i.e., in smart grid,
smart control systems, etc.). Now, in the next section, we'll talk about a
few different types of security threats in Cyber Physical systems (i.e., in
smart grid, smart medical devices, smart control systems, etc.).
4. Security threats in cyber-physical systems
In the previous section, we talked about the security requirements for
four different applications of CPSs. Now, we need to talk about some26possible threats in each of these applications. It talks about five types of
threats (criminal, financial, political, privacy, and physical) and how they
affect five things, like the source, target, motive, vector, and outcome
[17] (refer Table 2, in appendix A). Now, some other cyber physical at-
tacks are being talked about in this part.
4.1. Real-world cyber physical attacks
This discusses about Cyber (C), Cyber-Physical (CP), and Physical (P)
attacks on a number of CPS applications that harm CPS systems, and how
to avoid them. Publicly known attacks are very rare, and it's very hard to
get back or figure out what happened right away. Attacks are grouped in
this chapter based on where the injuries are. Cyber-attacks that don't hit
sensors or actuators are called “cyber.” Physical attacks that target
physical parts are called “physical.” Cyber-physical attacks, on the other
hand, are attacks that affect physical components by way of cyber com-
ponents. However, this isn't new when it comes to extortion control
systems. A lot of countries now have terror and physical attacks are used
to try to get money from people. Cyber-attacks [32–36] are a natural next
step in the evolution of physical attacks because they are faster, cheaper
for the target, don't have to be limited by distance, and are easier to make
and manage. It is now possible to list some cyber and physical attacks on
CPS as:
A. Cyber attacks on cyber physical systems
a) Industrial Control System Attacks: In 2010, an attack called “Stuxnet”
caused damage to several nuclear plants in Iran. Recently, hackers
from the United States have carried out a number of cyber-attacks on
Iran. Thus, two types of attacks have been found on ICS.
 Communication protocols: There were a lot of attacks that took
advantage of flaws in communication protocols. For example, a
SCADA device showed how to fool the address resolution protocol.
 Espionage: DuQu and Flame are two examples of hacking ICS attacks
that can be used to spy on people. Flame, for example, targeted and
found many ICS networks in the Middle East in 2012. The main goal
of this malware was to get private information from companies, like
their addresses and the keys they typed.
Many countries are being attacked by hackers or people who aren't
supposed to be there every day. Now, countries are using these attacks as
a weapon to cause as much damage as possible to the other country (the
enemy).
b) Smart Grid CPS Attack: This is the most common example of a smart
grid attack. Blackout is the most common. Attackers can do cyber-
attacks on Smart grids [23], which could cause a blackout (i.e., no
lights at all) in a country. When it happened in Europe and the United
States a few times in the last decade, it was very important.
c) Medical CPS attack: A distributed system is vulnerable to cyber-spies,
insider attacks, and other types of attacks. This is one of the main
threats. An insider can damage or tamper with any medical devices
and make machines do what he wants. An intruder could also harm
people by jamming the wireless signals that medical devices use to
keep people healthy. This would make the device unusable and not be
able to deliver the therapies needed.
d) Smart Vehicles Attacks: Controlling a vehicle or car from afar or
through an outside attack is a big problem. Any vehicle could be
hijacked by an attacker, which could cause a big accident on the road.
B. Physical attacks on cyber physical systems
Several physical threats/attacks have been listed in various applica-
tions of CPS in Table 2 (refer appendix A). some of the popular physical
attacks in previous decades are: i) in 2006, A computer at a water
filtering plant in Pennsylvania (USA) was hacked by an attacker and used
as its own spam and pirated software distribution system [19]. ii) At the
Davis-Besse power plant in Oak Harbor, Ohio, machines infected with the
A.K. Tyagi, N. Sreenath Internet of Things and Cyber-Physical Systems 1 (2021) 22–33Slammer worm shut down security monitor systems in January 2003. iii)
In 2000, the assault on the sewage control system of the Maroochy Shire
Council in Queensland, Australia (which was carried out by the
disgruntled ex-employee of the contractor firm that had built the
respective control system). Now, this section discusses a threat model in
CPS with an example.
4.2. An adversary model in cyber physical system
A thorough look at the security of any system is needed to figure out
what risks are likely to happen in the near future. Creating an adversary
model is a way to figure out how wide the problem is and how risky it is.
As far back as the last decade or so, cybercriminals have been hacking
computers wherever they can find them (even in control systems). Such
attacks may not be targeted (i.e., they are not meant to harm control
systems), but they may have negative side effects: control systems that
have been infected with malware may not work the way they should.
These attacks are important from a security point of view because they
are caused by insiders, people who have access to the computers and
networks used by control systems. Even if control networks were
completely isolated from public networks and the Internet, attacks by
insiders could still happen. Employees who don't like their jobs are the
main source of targeted computer attacks at the moment. Most of the
time, these workers do not work in groups. Their actions may not be as
harmful as those of larger, more organised groups. This is a big problem
in CPS that needs to be solved, and it needs practical and realistic
solutions.
This could be because terrorist groups and criminal gangs could try to
get into security structures. There is no proof that terrorists or activists
have used computer attacks to get into control systems. There is, how-
ever, some evidence that criminal groups may be involved. These days
aren't new, but CPS programmes are getting a lot of attention for their
money-making purposes. It is used to coerce and intimidate, like Iran and
Iraq have had physical attacks for a few years now. In the near future,
most military powers are looking at new threats, such as cyberattacks on
other countries' physical infrastructure.
 Attacks: Attackers can do things like resonance attacks on control
systems to get into them (i.e. attacks that are not feasible in con-
ventional IT systems). There were some sensors or controllers that
were hacked by someone else, making the physical system go back
and forth at its resonant frequency.
 Consequences of an Attack: To our knowledge, no one has looked at
the possible effects of attacks on important infrastructures. SCADA
security reports may sound like they're overreacting, but it's impor-
tant to remember that a user can get access to a control system that
doesn't belong to them. Most control systems have safety measures in
place to avoid major disasters.
Thus, this section talks about a lot of different threats to many CPSs,
such as financial, political, and privacy threats. Now, in the next section,
we'll go over some of the problems that many CPSs have.
5. Security challenges in cyber physical systems
The words challenge, threats, and vulnerabilities are used together in
this work (paper). Challenges are questions that haven't been answered
yet, and we want to encourage people to do research to find out how to
solve them. Vulnerabilities are internal (security) flaws in a system that
can be exploited by outsiders. Threats are things that could be bad for a
system.
A. General CPS security challenges
a) Security by Design: Most CPS are not designed with security in mind
because they are not connected to other networks, like the internet.
This means that security isn't taken into account in the design of most27CPS, because they are not connected to other networks. Physical se-
curity, then, was almost the most important way to keep people safe.
b) Cyber Physical Security: Physical security, then, was almost the most
important way to keep people safe. CPS designers need to change how
they think about security so that both the cyber and physical aspects
are taken into account. This could help us better predict and stop
future cyber-attacks that have physical consequences. We need to
build structures for both parts of the solution (cyber-physical solu-
tion) that have been overlooked before.
c) Real-Timeliness Nature: The requirement in real time is a require-
ment that affects the state of defence if it isn't met. Networks that are
under attack need to make quick decisions in CPS to stay alive. That
way, a CPS security design that takes into account the interactions
between physical and cyber aspects shows the whole world. This al-
lows for better risk assessment and threat detection as well as more
resilient solutions [20]. There must be lightweight and
hardware-based mechanisms built on top of cryptographic mecha-
nisms to improve real-time interaction and deadlines, so this is what
needs to happen.
d) Uncoordinated Change: There are a lot of people who work with the
CPS. It includes people whomake, use, own, and run things, as well as
people who work for them. It's important that they are properly
managed, even though their roles and rights are different. A lot of
people, as well as the different parts of the CPS, need to be taken care
of during the transition (a problem that we should not ignore). It's
important for stakeholders in a community of CPS parts to work
together at some point. Some ways to make things better, like
upgrading hardware, updating or changing applications, and adding
new features [21]. Keep in mind that any unplanned changes to CPS
security (i.e., new vulnerabilities) could make the system less secure
and could be a big problem for a country to deal with.
B. Industrial control system challenges
a) Change Management: In an ICS environment, many Internets of
Things (IoT) devices must be replaced, changed, or deleted. These
devices build different systems that must be replaced, changed, or
deleted (at one place). A system update in ICS, for example, needs to
be planned carefully to avoid problems. Also, many investors can
change the security posture of the ICS system without their knowl-
edge, so we need to coordinate change management to avoid and
track security-related changes in the ICS system [22].
b) Malicious Insider: A malicious insider is very hard to find or stop
because the attack is taking place inside of a company, either inten-
tionally or unintentionally. For example, an insider might use her or
his trust and inside information to launch an attack like the attack on
Maroochy water and sewage system (through remote attackers), or
the spread of Stuxnet. This is just one example (through a USB stick).
In this case, insiders could accidently use a virus-infected laptop or
USB stick that could give an ICS access point to outsiders. So, figuring
out who is an insider attacker is the biggest problem that many
research groups don't think about or don't pay attention to.
c) Secure Integration: The integration of new components into older
systems must be done in a safe way in order to avoid new security
flaws. Notice that ICS relies a lot on old systems that could be
vulnerable to flaws. Because there are so many old parts in ICS, it is
not possible to replace them all with new, safer ones. So, short-term
solutions need to be found to keep ICS from having any problems.
C. Smart grids challenges
a) Change Management: It's not easier to deal with changes in smart
grids than it is with ICS, but it isn't easier. Even though smart grids are
more complicated and have more people involved, they can't handle
changes very well. It makes change management a must-have for
healthy smart grids.
A.K. Tyagi, N. Sreenath Internet of Things and Cyber-Physical Systems 1 (2021) 22–33b) Two-Way Communication: A smart grid has two-way communication
because of the Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI). Unlike the
power grid, AMI allows smart metres to communicate with utility
companies that are close to customers' homes, which makes them
easier for physical attackers to get to. It has become more difficult to
keep these devices safe in smart grids, where there are more devices
than before.
c) Access Control Mechanisms: Smart Grids have a wide reach and a lot
of investors, so they need to have good access control mechanisms. It
is important to keep an eye on and control all possible access to the
network, data, or devices of smart grids. For emergency situations, it
is always best to give the people or groups who are supposed to help
enough power.
d) Privacy Concerns: People are worried about how their data will be
used. As smart grids become more common, this has become a big
problem for people. Not only should the data of customers be
encrypted, but it is also important to suggest anonymization tech-
niques to keep attackers from deducing patterns or encrypted data to
reveal private information. This is called “anonymization.” Thus, we
need to make sure that the mechanisms we build can encrypt and
aggregate data both safely [24].
e) Explicit Trust: In this case, there should be no clear trust given to
sensed data and commands that have been sent. Alternatively, new
ways must be found to identify false data and commands that are not
authorised [25]. FDI attacks can be hard to detect because of the large
size of smart grids, which make it hard to use certain algorithms that
only look for problems [26].
f) Comprehensive Security: It's good to have high-level security in smart
grids. It's bad at lower levels (due to the limited capabilities in the
devices on low-level). As a result, the level of security that must be put
in place at each level may not be the same. Many research groups
need to come up with lightweight solutions in order to do this. At all
levels of the smart grid, encryption is also important to keep infor-
mation private and secure. This is to avoid any security breach.
D. Medical devices challenges
a) Security Versus Usability: This can also happen if a device has too
much security. For example, not being able to change the unit when
the patient is in a critical condition. So, a person with IMDmight be in
a situation where another health care provider or doctor needs help
right away. The provider doesn't have cryptographic keys or access
rights that allow him or her to change the IMD, so not having the IMD
could be very dangerous.
b) Add-On Security Versus More Code: Security is important, but the
cost of putting it in should not be too high. Making IMDs more secure
could make the code bigger, which could make medical devices more
likely to be taken back. So, cryptographic operations that also affect
how medical devices work and how much they cost (be available to
patients) need to be made as light as possible.
c) Limited Resources: Cryptographic mechanisms use a lot of power (a
limited resource) and must keep that power up for a long time (long
time). Devices that need surgery to be put into a patient's body, for
example, need to work for a decade or two at the most (at least).
Another thing to note is that many attacks may try to drain a battery
to make a device not work, which is called a Denial of Service (DoS)
attack [27]. Keep in mind that the device gets signals from people
who don't want them and processes them. This can be a problem and
drain the battery. So, new control mechanisms need to be made so
that medical devices don't respond to any kind of malicious in-
teractions, which is why they need to be made.
E. Smart Vehicles challenges
a) When manufacturers put COTS and third-party modules into smart
cars, there are conflicting security assumptions at the edges of28integrations. Manufacturers of cars need to make sure that COTS
integration is stable and that other parts work well. It should make
sure that the manufacturer of a car doesn't make any concessions in
terms of security.
b) If the gateway Electronic Control Units (ECU) can be bypassed, then
many different types of attacks can be used against it (such as
bypassing it and getting into restricted bandwidths) [28]. Separating
critical and non-critical ECUs, using Ethernet/IP communications,
and replacing gateway ECUs with Master-ECUs are all effective ways
to make our cars work better.
c) Parts and components of vehicles are made or bought (imported) by
other partners in the vehicle industry. To make sure there aren't any
security holes or patches, both the seller and the buyer should pay
more attention to the needs for security, assessment, and testing.
From the start of the design process, manufacturers must think about
safety.
d) Because of the assumption that the CAN network is isolated, it is
vulnerable. New protocols that assume that there could be malicious
attackers are needed.
e) V2V (Vehicle to Vehicle) and V2I (Vehicle to Infrastructure) com-
munications are going to have a lot of new security problems in the
next few years. These threats are needed to stop efficient solutions
and let them work.
Hence, this section discusses various identified critical challenges (in
the past decade) in smart Vehicles, smart medical devices, industrial
control systems, etc. Now, next section will discuss more challenges
(especially) in medical cyber physical systems.
6. Challenges in medical cyber physical system
As discussed above, some challenges exist in medical devices and this
section discusses some other challenges prevalent in Medical Cyber-
Physical System (MCPS) which are needed to be solved in the near
future by researchers/scientists. Note that some useful points or details
like uses, open issues, challenges of (in) MCPS can be found in Ref. [33].
Hence, some other critical challenges in MCPS listed here as:
a) High Assurance Software: Medical devices use technology to
automate some features, like hardware (like security locks) and
other things. But it is well known that software development is too
important to keep MCPS safe.
b) Interoperability: It is important to make sure that the medical
devices that work together are safe, accurate, efficient, and secure
and that they have been certified.
c) Context awareness: In addition to giving a better sense of the
patient's general health, information about the patient that is
shared during system contact can also help detect disease early
and raise alarms in emergencies, as well.
d) Autonomy: The analytical knowledge that MCPS has can be used
to make the device more flexible by allowing it to be used to treat
patients in a way that is best for them at that time. In this way, the
loop must be closed safely and quickly.
e) Security and Privacy: security and privacy of MCPSs is very
important, because MCPSs collect medical data and also manage
the data they collect. Because of this, it's important to keep them
safe from anyone getting their hands on or changing any of their
information. Such an act can cause the patient to lose their pri-
vacy, be discriminated against, be abused, or even be hurt by
someone else.
f) Certifiability: MCPS needs a cost-effective way to show that
medical device software is reliable and safe, like by getting
medical device certification.
g) Executable clinical workflows: Today, more and more medical
devices connect with each other and work together so that they
can build and deploy MCPS quickly to provide efficient clinical
A.K. Tyagi, N. Sreenath Internet of Things and Cyber-Physical Systems 1 (2021) 22–33services to a (given) patient. Patients' safety is the biggest problem
with putting MCPS on the market. As a result, we need to make
sure that patients are safe in these unique situations by using
valid, workable clinical workflows.
h) Model-based Development: It will be easier to figure out how safe
a scenario is for patients before we build a software system, and it
will help us write specifications for safe devices that can be used in
the scenario and its connections. Then, during deployment, these
specifications can be checked to make sure that the implementa-
tion is safe. Notice how scenario analysis is done with the help of
MCPS model-based growth, which is how it is done. The most
difficult thing is to figure out how static and dynamic security
checks work together.
i) Physiological close-loop control: There are a lot of things that
people don't like about using automatic control in medical care,
like controlling an application to a certain point, doing multiple
treatments at the same time that could affect a lot of different body
systems in complicated patients, and so on. Keep in mind that each
person's treatment may be different.
j) Patient Modelling and Simulation: It's important to have models of
patients so that we can look at how different situations and closed-
loop control work. One of the things being talked about here is the
need to figure out how the drug is absorbed and pay attention to
important things like the heart and respiratory rates of the patient
in closed loop PCA situations. We need more simple methods to
help us solve the problem of designing and analysing things. These
methods could make some comprehensive models less
complicated.
k) Adaptive Patient and smart alarms: This is the fourth thing that
we're going to talk about in this text. Most of the medical equip-
ment is made to work for groups of patients (having similar
medical conditions). Patients may have a very different reaction to
treatment, which could cause a lot of confusion and waste time in
MCPS. For example, if a potentially dangerous condition is found,
most medical devices may sound an alarm at the same time. It is
also possible for medical devices to send out false alarms. Care-
takers don't have these kinds of things happen to them. Today,
medical devices are building a strong network connection so that
they can provide an efficient solution to patients and collect data
that can be used to make Electronic Health Records. This is how it
works: (EHR). In that case, we need to make algorithms that can
be changed to fit a patient's specific needs. Our plan is to look at
the patient's exercise history in the EHR and change the thresholds
for the alarms, so that there are less false alarms, as well. In the
near future, we will be able to use “smart alarm services” in
medical devices to cut down on false alarms.
l) User Centred Design: The caregiver may make mistakes because
they are overworked or stressed, or because they have trouble
operating a device. So, medical devices might have to be made
with the needs of the people who will use them in mind, like
having a user-friendly interface, interactive ways to learn how to
use the device if they get stuck, and ways to fix mistakes so that
people will be happy with how the device works.
m) Infrastructure for Medical-Device Integration and Interopera-
bility: At the moment, only one company is developing distributed
MCPS that use a proprietary communication protocol (making
regulatory approval simpler, but reducing the benefits of inter-
device communication). There are many open standards (inter-
connectivity) that are the norm when it comes to MCPS (including
basis for interoperability of medical devices). Still, these standards
need to be more effective if they can be used on platforms that are
easy to make and use. Manufacturers of medical devices have to
follow certain rules when they make their products in order to
make them work together and integrate with each other to get the
most out of them.29n) Compositionality: Techniques like temporal induction can help
keep MCPS systems safe by making it easier to think about how
devices that are connected to each other interact with each other
in a certain way. The most difficult thing to do in this situation is
to figure out howmedical devices might interact in a way that isn't
expected. Radio interference may happen between medical de-
vices that are giving different treatments to the same person
because they are close together. Treatments can interfere with
each other by changing how the body responds to them. “Mixed
criticality” is an example of this. Mean Arterial Pressure (MAP)
measurement is based on where the patient and the sensor are in
relation to each other. Because the bed of the patient, which is a
medical device of Class I, which is the least important in the FDA
classification, is raised, the reading of the MAP changes. If the
MAP sensor is part of a system that keeps an eye on things like a
patient's vital signs, the sudden change could cause false alarms or
other bad behaviour. This problem was used to give the moni-
toring system more information about the environment. Trying to
figure out how to make these devices while taking these things
into account is hard.
o) Security and Privacy: In general, when medical devices connect to
the internet, they have some networking abilities that could lead
to security and privacy breaches when they are used together.
Patients could be hurt or even killed if someone hacks into the
MCPS network (by re-programming devices). Extremely, we can
limit the functionality of devices that can be called up through the
network interface but not accept any commands from the
network, which is what we can do now. It's hard to keep the right
balance between being able to move around and being safe (for
MCPS). We need to come up with some effective ways to deal with
problems in electronic health records.
p) Verification, Validation and Certification: Before verification and
certification are done, they are done when the design is finished.
This is how it is now. The “design for verification approach” can
be used to make scaling for verification easier and easier to get the
proof of the verification process. iii) Another method called
model-based generative techniques allows verification to be done
in the early stages of design, which increases the guarantees that
can be provided by verification. Note that medical devices can be
made into run-time parts.
Hence, this section discusses various identified critical challenges (in
the past decade) in medical cyber physical systems. Now, next section
will suggest some countermeasures or solutions for such critical (iden-
tified) problems/challenges (identified in Section 5 and 6).
7. Some counter measures/solutions
Most of the efforts to protect control systems (especially SCADA) have
so far been based on reliability (protecting the system from random er-
rors). Hence, an essential issue is protecting control systems against
several malicious cyber-attacks.
 Prevention: Preventing attacks on medical devices is a better way to
deal with them than waiting for them to happen. Many companies are
working on ways to keep their chemical, oil, and gas, and water fa-
cilities safe, like by making sure they have safety plans in place. NIST
has also released a Guide to Industrial Control System (ICS) Security
[29,30] to talk about how to keep control systems safe, as well. Sensor
networks are also used in process control systems like SCADA [31].
There are two groups working on standardising the communication
between them. Safety of these wireless communication devices/ideas
can be made more secure by setting up confidentiality and integrity
mechanisms that work both hop-by-hop and end-to-end (with
providing necessary protocols for access control and key
management).
A.K. Tyagi, N. Sreenath Internet of Things and Cyber-Physical Systems 1 (2021) 22–33 Detection and Recovery: When an attack is successful, there is no
way to stop it. Security engineers have come to realise that detection
and response are important. Control systems are used to look at
network or computer system traces for signs of intrusion. Attacks that
aren't visible from the IT side can be found by looking at the physical
system for signs of trouble. However, algorithms haven't been used to
look for deception attacks on estimation and control algorithms.
Further, no one has come up with a way to tell if controllers or sensors
have been hacked, but if the people who run the systems are told, we
can detect many attacks. However, research on human-computer
interaction is important and difficult, because not only do we need
recovery with a person in the loop, but we also need to be able to
recover without a person in the loop. As a result, new problems can be
seen when people look at and design a safe system after using
autonomous real-time decision-making algorithms that control the
real world. So, a control theory that changes how fault detection and
isolation works is needed to come up with autonomous and real-time
detection and response algorithms for safety-critical apps.
 Resilience: Today, there are many ways to make control systems that
can withstand even the most serious attacks. Redundancy, for
example, is a way to make sure there isn't just one place where things
could go wrong. Diversity is a way to keep all copies (the extra
redundancy) from being corrupted by a single attack method. So, we
need to come up with a new, more robust control and estimation
algorithm that looks at real-world models of attack (from a security
point of view). So, making access control policies (closed-loop dy-
namics of controlled systems) isn't enough without taking into ac-
count the results of “what if” type questions. The way closed-loop
dynamics work when network parts are attacked must be based on
this kind of analysis.
 Deterrence: People who commit crimes outside our borders are more
likely to be deterred if we have good laws, good police, and good
international partnerships.
Hence, this section provides several countermeasures/solutions to
identified challenges or problem in various cyber physical systems. Now,
next section will list some open issues or key finding in CPS for re-
searchers (as future work). In continuation to this, several open issues
will be discussed in Medical cyber physical system (with noticing
importance of such system in future).
8. Open issues/key finding in cyber physical system
When it comes to engineering, today's Cyber Physical System is at a
high point, which makes it a very complex, multi-scale system that can
change. These systems are being used in a wide range of applications in
some of the most important sectors, and they have also sparked a desire
for researchers to look into other solutions. Those are the main findings
of our research work.
 Cyber-physical systems have become a lot more common, but there
are still some parts of the field that aren't well-defined or that are still
being studied. It takes a lot of work to make CPSs work in the real
world. This includes a lot of cross-disciplinary knowledge, tight
integration of the enabling technologies, and careful attention to the
human and environmental aspects.
 It is very important for a system to have a common vocabulary,
comprehensive concepts, abstract models, system frameworks, and
standards that work together. Conceptualization, development,
implementation, and testing of CPSs all need a strong theory and
method for abstracting to work well (also conceptual and computa-
tional abstractions, i.e., which is useful for both human and compu-
tational agents).
 Abstractions should be used in formal models to make it easier to
write down, build, and connect CPSs. mathematical logic and nu-
merical calculations must be used to make continuous control models30(of physical systems) and to make discrete digital models (of physical
systems) (with higher level of integration). Many concepts, such as
synergy, compositionality, time-correct control and operation, goal-
oriented learning, and so on, also need to be looked at by the
research community.
 Advances in software, information, communication, and control
technologies made it even easier for electromechanical and computer
technologies to get smaller and smaller.
 It is very easy to identify, profile, and assess CPSs because they all
have a lot of different things that make them unique. There are a lot of
big differences between CPSs in terms of how they work, how they
look, and how they can be used, but also in terms of their intelligence,
adaptability, and self-management.
 Many scientific, technological, and application problems arise
because of their inherent characteristics, such as symbiosis,
complexity, heterogeneity, uncertainty, adaptability, scalability,
robustness, safety, security, and so on. These characteristics get extra
attention from the research community.
 Everybody can use CPSs, and they can be used for anything at any
time. CPSs are built on the idea that they can be used anywhere, from
home and work to hospitals and entertainment. They can also be used
for other things at any time. In addition to having 100% connectivity
and reliability, they also need to be able to provide instant and
context-appropriate response, inform themselves and store the in-
formation they get or make, make reliable decisions either alone or
together, and be self-aware, self-sustaining, self-adapting, and self-
repairing.
 CPSs need to be able to learn at the first, second, and third levels.
Sensors and miners are used to get information about the system.
Miners then use the information to think about how to make the
system run better in predefined task windows. Using second-level
learning, CPSs can learn about the environment in which they
work, and they can adapt to changing situations (to keep a static norm
state) by changing their functions. Third-level learning lets them
change their structure and function based on the mix of synchronous
and asynchronous events that come in.
Since many unrelated ideas and technologies will not lead to the next
generation of CPSs, this means they won't come together to form them.
Systems (holistic) interconnections, model-driven specification and real
time computation will lead to it being built. Platforms and components
will be used to build it. It will be built with minimal intrusion.
8.1. Open issues in medical cyber physical system (MCPS)
During our research, we have found a few things that need to be done
in the field of Medical Cyber Physical System (MCPS). These issues can be
called:
8.1.1. Security and privacy
Security and privacy issues are being talked about in MCPS, which is
when medical devices can talk to each other. An attacker who wants to
get into an MCPS network can also harm or kill patients by reprogram-
ming tools, as we talked about above. With closed-loop monitoring,
automated therapy delivery, and warnings, the greater flexibility of
MCPS could make the problem worse. There are four groups of people
who can be targeted by an MCPS, and they can choose from any of them.
 Patient: An attacker tries to hurt the patient's health right in front of
them. Targeting the MCPS parts of sensing, processing, communi-
cating, and giving treatment is usually the best way to do this for
example, someone could hack into an infusion pump and make it give
out more medicine than it needs to.
 Data: An attacker gets into MCPS health data from individual patients
in an unapproved way. Patients may not be able to keep their iden-
tities private, which could lead to discrimination and misdeeds.
A.K. Tyagi, N. Sreenath Internet of Things and Cyber-Physical Systems 1 (2021) 22–33 Device: People try to do denial of service (DoS) attacks on the MCPS
in a number of ways, which means that it can't do its job properly,
resulting in privacy loss or the failure of CPS systems.
 Institutions: The goal is to break up or get a lot of access to patient
data or organisational network information from the inside of the
institutions.
There are medical devices that are made to be able to send data in the
future, like sensor readings or event logs, but they can't be used to do
anything. In this way, we will be able to get over security and privacy
concerns in medical devices. Also, device manufacturers should come up
with some effective ways to keep their products safe, such as relying on
security through obscurity. To keep medical devices and the Medical
Device Coordination Framework (MDCF) from being hacked, we could
start encrypted communications and save information in a block using
Blockchain connects. As a first step, we could build trust in the devices
and the clinical workflow.
8.1.2. Continuous monitoring and care
Today's patients need to be looked after all the time, so we need to
come up with medical devices that can help (i.e., monitoring, decision
support, and delivery of therapy). These devices may come up with new
ways to get health care, like home-based or ambulatory care, which could
help cut down on the overall cost of health care. They also send notifi-
cations in case of emergencies, so the person who comes first can get the
most up-to-date information about the patient's health. These systems are
made to track a wide range of conditions, like cardiovascular and
neurological problems, as well as meta-physiological state information
(sleep, wakefulness, fatigue), activity monitoring, and a lot of intense
environmental medical monitoring (e.g., space).
There are always problems with patient modelling and simulation,
user-centred design, the design of medical devices, and the continuous
monitoring and care of patients in MCPS. These are the main issues.
MCPS has four issues that need to be looked at by computer and other
research communities. These are:
 Reduce the amount of time it takes to set up and use security
solutions.
 Dealing with the different types of MCPS that don't work with system-
wide solutions.
 Making security solutions easier to use (including transparency)
 Taking into account the security implications of security solutions and
decisions.
Hence, this section discusses several essential issues in Cyber Physical
Systems (including medical devices, smart grids, etc.). Now, next section
will discuss several important opportunities in Cyber Physical Systems
for future (in detail).
9. Opportunities for cyber-physical systems
They are very good at stopping the damage that disasters do to society
and the economy. Cyber Physical System technologies can help. There
are a lot of technologies for rapid evacuation management systems that
can track environmental and geographical problems that are spread out
across a large area, figure out how damage spreads, and figure out how to
control traffic. These technologies can be used to stop the bad effects of
disasters. There are a lot of ways that CPS research can help close the gap
between the amount of food or other things people want and the number
of things they have. Precision farming, smart water management, and
efficient food distribution are all examples of technology that can help
solve this problem. This means that more food can be consumed and
more food can be made. Because of this, some of the opportunities for
cyber physical systems:31 There were almost no car accidents, very few injuries, and a lot less
traffic congestion and delays.
 Buildings and cities that use less electricity.
 Medical and healthcare systems that are smart, reliable, and flexible.
 Generation and distribution of electricity that doesn't go down
 Farming with a lot of fruit
 Faster and more safe evacuation in the event of any disaster.
 Assists for busy, old or disabled people all their lives.
 Users can get high-quality medicine at anytime, anywhere.
 It takes less time and money to test complex CPS systems (like avi-
onics) that use only a few magnitude orders.
 Building and cities that are aware of energy
 Physical critical infrastructure that needs to be checked before it
breaks down.
 One off system is used in high-tech CPS buildings to avoid fatal
injuries.
The Cyber Physical System (CPS) systems also made mobile health-
care more popular, because they made it easier for patients to get effi-
cient solutions or services. This is why it became more popular. So, this
section talks about how cyber physical systems can help future re-
searchers, scientists, and governments. In the next section, we'll sum up
this work in a very short way, and then we'll talk about some future
improvements and work.
10. Conclusion
Because of new technology, there have been a lot of new ideas (like
fog computing, edge computing, compressed sending, and so on) in the
last decade. Cyber physical systems are being used in a lot of important
applications to do a lot of complicated things quickly (efficiently). Many
problems, important issues, and research gaps have been identified and
included in this article. Possible solutions are also discussed (as a sug-
gestion) for a wide range of applications, such as medical care, industrial
control, smart transportation, and more. In this article, we have talked
about the current state of the field of secure control (in CPS). We still
don't know how to solve most of our research problems, but we agree that
future research in specific applications can add an extra layer of security
(protection) to CPS/control systems. So, this paper looked at a lot of
important issues that need to be worked on in computing, communica-
tion, and control technology (for the cyber-physical systems of the
future). In addition, we've talked about some other research issues, like
how to keep things stable, how to make things work better, and how to
model, design, and build things. We looked at some recent research ar-
ticles in these areas. Researchers who work with Cyber Physical Systems,
especially to improve the security of CPSs, should do their best to fix or
list issues, research gaps, challenges, or any other open problem. This
work can be expanded to encourage research into how to combine CPS
with IoT and different cloud computing technologies, such as Google
Cloud Platform (GCP). It can also be used for research on how to use
resources more efficiently by integrating CPS with transportation and
energy systems, how to make medical devices work better together, and
so on.
Competing interests
We, the authors declare that we have no competing interests
regarding publication of this work.
Authors’ contributions
Both Amit Kumar Tyagi and N Sreenath have contributed equally. N
Sreenath has analysed, and approved the final manuscript for
publication.
A.K. Tyagi, N. Sreenath Internet of Things and Cyber-Physical Systems 1 (2021) 22–33Appendix A
Table 2
Threats on Several Applications of Cyber Physical Systems
Industrial Control System (ICS) Smart Grids Medical Devices Smart Vehicles32Criminal
ThreatsIt's possible for an intruder who knows
a lot about an ICS application to use
wireless capabilities (vector) to get
into and mess with the system
(source).A smart metre and the utility company
communicate with each other so that
thieves who want to rob a house can
figure out private information about
the home's occupants, like whether or
not they're home (consequence).Hackers can use wireless tools to harm
patients and change their health
conditions by injecting or
retransmitting legitimate commands
(vector). This can change the device's
state and expected operations, which
can lead to an unwelcome health
condition (consequence).It's possible for someone to hack into a
car's ECUs and cause it to crash or lose
control by exploiting a weakness in the
wireless interfaces (source)
(consequence).Financial
ThreatsBy tampering with physical equipment
or injecting false data (vector), a
customer (source) can cause a
financial loss to the utility (target).
The customer is trying to lower a
utility bill.A customer (source) might try to
change a company's billing system
(target) so that he or she can lower the
electricity bill (consequence). Utility
companies (source) may also be
interested in getting private
information from their customers
(target) by looking at how much
electricity they use and how often they
use different types of appliances in
their homes (vector) to give this
information to advertisers, which is a
violation of their privacy
(consequence). Another way for
someone to cause a blackout is to take
a lot of smart metres (target).Political
ThreatsBy spreading malware or accessing
field devices (vector), a hostile nation
can start a cyber-war against another
country. This can happen by shutting
down a plant, sabotaging components,
or polluting the environment
(consequence). Intelligence agencies
(source) can spread malware (vector)
on other countries' CIs (targets), which
could lead to serious attacks that could
break the confidentiality of important
data (consequence).A hostile country can start a cyber-war
against another country's national
power system (source) by getting
remote access to the smart grids'
infrastructure (vector). This can lead
to large-scale blackouts, disturbances,
or financial losses (consequence).Cyberwar has another way for a country
that is threatening to attack political
figures (source). They could attack their
medical devices by exploiting the
devices wireless communications
(vector), which could cause a critical
health issue or even death
(consequence).A cyber-war can be started by a
country that isn't friendly (source)
against national transportation roads
and their commuters (target) by
hacking into smart cars that can be
fully controlled from afar (vector).
This can cause large-scale collisions
and critical injuries (consequence).Privacy
ThreatsThis is what happened: A hacker
(source) used wireless hacking tools
(vector) to get information about a
patient's medical device, a disease, or
any other private information (target).
This violated the patient's privacy and
confidentiality (consequence). At
different places, the medical devices
that are used to communicate with
other people, such as hospitals, store a
lot of private information. An attacker
(source) with spying motives (motive)
wants to get unauthorised access to
such data (target) by getting into the
networks that connect the legitimate
parties involved (vector). This results in
a breach of privacy (consequence).A hacker (source) can listen in on
private conversations in a Vehicle
(target) by exploiting flaws in the TCU
(vector). This results in a breach of
privacy (consequence). When a hacker
(source) exploits the GPS navigation
system (vector), for example, he or she
can track a Vehicle (target). This can
lead to privacy violations
(consequence). Some driving habits
and traffic violations can also be
exploited by vehicle manufacturers
without the driver's help. This is
because they can get Vehicles' logs
stored in ECUs (source). It's possible
that manufacturers will also sell this
information to insurance companies.Physical
ThreatsPutting heat or cold on a sensor that
measures the temperature of a specific
environment (target) can make it send
false readings to the control centre,
which makes them look bad
(consequence).An attacker (source) could vandalise
(vector) parts of smart grids (target)
that aren't covered by the power grid,
which could cause problems with
administration and even power
outages (consequence).In order to stop the medical service or
even change the configurations of a
medical device (target), an attacker
(source) can physically tamper with it.
The user won't be able to get the
medical service they want, which could
lead to bad health conditions
(consequence).An attacker (source) can easily get into
a car and attack a malicious device or
mess with the car's outside parts
(vector), which can cause accidents
(consequence).