Anyone involved in designing or finding molecules in the life sciences over the past few years has witnessed a 
dramatic change in how we now work due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Computational technologies like artificial 
intelligence (AI) seemed to become ubiquitous in 2020 and have been increasingly applied as scientists worked 
from home and were separated from the laboratory and their colleagues. This shift may be more permanent as the 
future of molecule design across different industries will increasingly require machine learning models for design 
and optimization of molecules as they become “designed by AI ”. AI and machine learning has essentially become 
a commodity within the pharmaceutical industry. This perspective will briefly describe our personal opinions 
of how machine learning has evolved and is being applied to model different molecule properties that crosses 
industries in their utility and ultimately suggests the potential for tight integration of AI into equipment and 
automated experimental pipelines. It will also describe how many groups have implemented generative models 
covering different architectures, for de novo design of molecules. We also highlight some of the companies at the 
forefront of using AI to demonstrate how machine learning has impacted and influenced our work. Finally, we 
will peer into the future and suggest some of the areas that represent the most interesting technologies that may 
shape the future of molecule design, highlighting how we can help increase the efficiency of the design-make-test 
cycle which is currently a major focus across industries. 
Like most other scientists, those involved in designing or finding
olecules for commercial applications in the life sciences (including
n human healthcare, animal health, agrochemicals, consumer products
nd beyond) have witnessed a dramatic change in how we now work due
o the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. During the pandemic, non-essential
esearch was halted, and scientists were sent home in many countries.
his led to a noticeable work divide, as those scientists that could use
 computer for their research were able to work remotely, while other
ypes of research ceased entirely. What does this tell us about how scien-
ific research will change if this pandemic continues for years to come
r if we are faced with other barriers to physical lab access? If scien-
ists must work remotely, could they still do their lab experiments re-
otely? Perhaps we will see more purpose built “remote-controlled ” lab-
ratories that provide this as a service. In the chemical synthesis arena,
ome groups have already experimented with partial or completely au-
onomous synthesis [1–6] , while in pharmaceutical screening this has
een essentially fully automated for decades with minimal human input.
espite these different types of automation, the presence of a scientist
or manual lab-work is still needed. However, if we put these elementsR&D, Research and development; AI, Artificial intelligence; GCNN, Graph convolut
emory. 
∗ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: sean@collaborationspharma.com (S. Ekins). 
w  
ttps://doi.org/10.1016/j.ailsci.2022.100031 
eceived 24 December 2021; Received in revised form 21 January 2022; Accepted 2
vailable online 24 January 2022 
667-3185/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access ar
 http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) ogether, we can automate the complete process and run it remotely
uch that the design-make-test cycle ( Fig. 1 A, B) is fully autonomous
cross industries. Would this approach eventually become the norm for
esearch and development (R&D) labs? Perhaps, in the same way that
e see many laboratories have automated liquid dispensers or robots
oday for repetitive tasks. If so, where does that leave basic research
n other scientific domains which are less able to be automated or do
ot have the financial resources? These groups may be left behind. Au-
omation of the design-make-test cycle in chemistry is a rapidly evolving
rea that could benefit from its own focused review. In addition, the re-
ource limitations during the pandemic should also make us consider
he importance of each experiment and how to do research more fru-
ally if consumables such as pipette tips or other essential items are in
hort supply. We need to rethink what experiments are the most criti-
al and how we can recycle and reuse data that already exists to ensure
xperiments are not repeated unnecessarily if the original resource data
as yet to be utilized. There is a continually growing and already im-
ense amount of biological data in the public domain. Some of it is
eadily accessible in databases such as PubChem, ChEMBL etc. [ 7 , 8 ] or
ncreasingly other repositories like FigShare, GitHub etc., while some of
t resides in less accessible areas like publications which may be pay-
alled or on individual laboratory websites. There is also considerableional neural network; RNN, Recurrent Neural Networks; LSTM, Long short-term 
3 January 2022 
ticle under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
F. Urbina and S. Ekins Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100031 
Fig. 1. A. The design-make-test cycle. B. A hypothetical example of how a Re- 
current Neural Network can be combined with the machine learning models and 
feedback from scientists to optimize the kinase inhibitor lapatinib.
What the pandemic also did was accelerate bringing these various
spects of research to a head at the same time to demonstrate the need
or tighter integration between research areas and specialties. It has also
ighlighted how we look at artificial intelligence (AI) and, the area of
achine learning as a fundamental technology for molecule design [9–
1] which we will explore further herein. 
he next commodity 
Commodities are often considered as the basics in life which we hapen to take for granted, not only food stuffs, but materials (ores), chemt 2 cals and computer memory. When they are in short supply, like the
upply chain issues we are seeing during the current pandemic, they
an have dramatic effects. While AI is not a new technology to the drug
iscovery space, in less than a decade, machine learning has been revoutionized with the addition of new architectures such as attention-base
odels, increased dataset availability, and improved hardware, reducng or removing barriers to machine learning applications [12–14] . In
esponse to this, in recent years we have seen AI and specifically machine learning methods [ 11 , 15 , 16 ] applied in many industries to the point where we would posit it could also now be considered a scienific commodity. Like many other groups, we are interested in applying computational algorithms to drug discovery and over the last decade
have noticed how AI has become ubiquitous as it has been applied to
any areas of pharmaceutical research. This is by no means new as
I and machine learning or computational approaches in general have
een applied in the pharmaceutical industry for many decades. Machine
earning has now become a frequent topic of discussion at conferences,
ith an exploding number of papers describing applications of AI, even
rossing over into the popular press. This has implications for the phar-
aceutical industry if AI is seen as an essential component of the R&D
rocess in the same way that we have synthesis, in vitro and in vivo, clin-
cal testing etc. This may also change the perception of computational
pproaches as having at least equal importance in the R&D process. This
as also made us consider what may be the near and distant future of
pplying machine learning in drug discovery if it becomes important
nough to be now considered a commodity. 
Perhaps driving this new-found interest of AI is that over the last few
ears we have seen companies focusing on AI obtain very significant
mounts of funding and sign massive deals with major pharmaceutical
ompanies (Table S1). Several of these companies have used machine
earning in different contexts but all have applied their software to drug
iscovery projects ( Table 1 ). Obviously, not all companies publish on
heir technologies to the same extent which can lead to a degree of
pacity as to how they use AI. It may not be necessary to raise such
ums of money in order to compete with this success on an admittedly
maller scale. There has been recognition of the increasing generation
nd use of open source machine learning and cheminformatics software
hich has impacted the status quo of commercial cheminformatics soft-
are [17] and can be used as a starting point for a new generation of
maller drug discovery companies. For example, it is possible to build
n such open-source software to develop machine learning tools and
odels to assist in drug discovery and toxicology internal projects [18–
1] as well as share such technologies with academic collaborators so
hey can benefit from it. At the same time there are many industries
uch as consumer product and smaller pharmaceutical companies that
o not have such cheminformatics expertise and these efforts could be
 useful template for them to license or emulate. To illustrate the po-
ential of this approach of developing and applying machine learning
or drug discovery with minimal funding we use our own experiences
hich have used public data for projects either alone or in conjunc-
ion with additional private data (Table S2). While these examples are
redominantly for drug discovery they could be extended to other in-
ustries or applications. Such models can increasingly leverage public
nowledge to enable selection of compounds to test against targets for
oth rare, neglected and common diseases [ 22 , 23 ] ( Table 1 , Table S2).
ence with modest funding it is feasible to perform the computational
lement of this work and build up wet lab capabilities to facilitate the in
itro work to validate such models. At small drug discovery companies,
he pandemic shutdown demonstrated the importance of having ma-
hine learning in house and how companies in collaboration with others
eeded to be more agile in applying such technologies [ 22 , 24 , 25 ]. 
Table 1 
Examples of drug discovery applications of various machine learning to targets and diseases from AI companies. 
Area of 
research / 
Disease 
Target/ 
property 
Outcome Company References 
Canavan disease aspartate N - 
acetyltransferase 
AtomNet deep neural network for structure-based drug discovery uses a 
model trained on bioactivity data and protein structures. They scored 10 M 
molecules and 60 were tested in vitro with 5 compounds having low or sub 
𝜇M activity. 
Atomwise [62] 
Infectious 
disease 
COVID-19 Workflow used knowledge graph information from recent literature using 
machine learning based extraction to identify baricitinib. This molecule 
progressed from a clinical trial to emergency FDA approval. 
BenevolentAI [63] 
Various Various drug 
rediscovery 
examples 
de novo generative design benchmarking study used rediscovery of various 
drugs with different algorithms. 
BenevolentAI [64] 
Rare disease Fragile X Disease-Gene Expression Matching approach to repurposing identified 
sulindac which rescued the phenotype in the Fmr1 knock outknoc mouse. 
Healx [65] 
Fibrosis DDR1 kinase Generative machine learning to discover novel compounds validated in vivo In silico 
Medicine 
[52] 
Infectious 
disease 
Antibacterials 
against E. coli 
Machine learning, virtual screening and in vitro testing In silico 
Medicine 
[66] 
Various Various Different generative approaches were used and evaluated including 
entangled conditional adversarial autoencoder, reinforced adversarial 
neural computer, and Adversarial threshold neural computer. They either 
purchased compounds similar to those proposed and then tested them in 
vitro against various kinases or alternatively they synthesized proposed 
compounds and tested them 
In silico 
Medicine 
[67] 
[68] 
[69] 
Various sEH, ERa and 
c-KIT 
Applied machine learning algorithms (random forest or graph convolutional 
neural network (GCNN)) to DNA encoded libraries then validated the 
predictions in vitro . GCNN models had higher hit rates and potencies. 
X-Chem [56] 
Various IMPDH, JNK3 
etc. 
Graph based deep generative model to create linkers for combining two 
fragments for scaffold hopping and PROTACS using a gated graph neural 
network incorporating 3D information. Molecules were assessed with a 
range of 2D and 3D metrics and outperformed a baseline. 
ExScientia Ltd [70] 
Various Various Multiple machine learning approaches applied to searching commercial and 
proprietary libraries, lead optimization and repurposing. 
Yet it is widely accepted that prior paradigms such as random
igh-throughput screening has a success-rate (hit-rate) of 0.01–0.14%
26] and in some cases fails completely. While there are many caveats
hich must be taken into consideration, we can consider our own pre-
icted vs . verified hit-rates using machine learning, were we often see
ncreases in the success-rate by 10–100 fold, and in some cases even
000 fold. Again, for illustration purposes, several cases from our own
ork suggests in vitro hit rates of: 100% (3/3, Ebola) [27] , 11% (11/97
hagas) [28] , 25% (1/5, Yellow Fever) [29] . Some of these projects were
lso validated using in vivo testing (Chagas, 5/97 = 5.2% in vivo hit rate
28] ). Combined, these examples demonstrate how companies can use
achine learning technologies to create many molecule assets, and that
achine learning has proven to be successfully predict molecular hits
 Table 1 , and Table S2) that a much larger company (not using such
pproaches) would have only been able to generate with many more
mployees and a much larger financial investment. While this point is
ot new, when considered with the advent of generative models, dis-
ussed below, it suggests than an accelerated early-stage drug discovery
ipeline is just around the corner: Using machine learning models to
uide generative models for new molecular IP, we can reasonably ex-
ect machine learning to find/generate many more molecules than have
een virtually screened in the past. It is likely that while this technol-
gy has yet to replace scientists that do this drug discovery research,
e would argue it has already augmented those using it with the intel-
igence of many more experienced scientists. In this context, applying
achine learning allows these scientists to identify and generate “inven-
ions ” as well as determine which may be worthy of patenting and/or
ublishing with commercial applications. 
It was clear to us that 2020 demonstrated that the pathway from
ideas to molecules to treatments ” can be increasingly aided by ma-
hine learning algorithms, to the point where they become relatively
ransparent because they are accepted as part of the drug discovery or
esign process like other types of tools. While this software is freely
vailable through open-source projects, replacing what was previously
nly commercially available and used by experts, how they are applied
nd integrated makes the difference to their likely success or failure. This
an also be considered as one definition of what is termed end-to-end
achine learning [11] . It is also likely that what will ultimately differ-
ntiate such companies in this space from competitors (Table S1) are the
uration of the available underlying experimental data and ensuring the
uality and validity of the machine learning models that form the ba-
is for each companies differentiating technology. Continual curation of
ata in larger companies may allow them to capture the decades of drug
iscovery and toxicology domain knowledge of employees which they
ave considerably more of compared with newer companies. Knowing
hat are the ‘pros and cons’ of the different machine learning algorithms
s also important, as no single algorithm or resulting model is likely to
e the best for all prediction tasks [30] (Table S2, S3). Drug discovery
s challenging and not an area to embark upon if you have no concept
f what the application domain is. There is still a need for a scientist
n the loop for most drug discovery machine learning models, however
his does not mean we are far from their autonomous use. 
he future of molecules designed by AI 
The future of molecule design across multiple industries (pharma-
euticals, agrochemicals, consumer products etc.) will require machine
earning models for the design and optimization of molecules and their
roperties through the complete design-make-test cycle ( Fig. 1 ). “De-
igned by AI ” is not the end for machine learning. While machine learn-
ng can be used to model and predict most types of data that are gen-
rated in the research and development process [11] , this is certainly
ot limited to predicting a bioactivity or toxicity endpoints. Machine
earning models may also help at different stages of research to aid in
olecule purification, identification or quantification where perhaps a
olecule has never been synthesized and no reference data is avail-4 ble. For example, modeling outputs of analytical data such as spec-
ra (MS, FT-IR, UV–Vis [31] ) or more complex in vivo data all the
ay to more abstract predictions, such as potential success of commer-
ialization [ 32 , 33 ] are possible with machine learning. While learning
rom known molecule related data is potentially valuable, going be-
ond what is currently known or state-of-the-art and proposing new
olecules to synthesize based on the machine learning models, a physic-
chemical property, or other data is an area of major interest. There has
een substantial activity in recent years with small molecules designed
nd generated by generative models using many different architectures
uch as Variational Autoencoder [34] , Generative Adversarial Networks
35] and Recurrent Neural Networks [36] (RNN, Fig. 1 , Table 1 )) [36–
1] to produce molecules de novo [ 10 , 36 , 42-48 ]. For further detail the
eader is pointed to the multiple reviews on this area [49–51] . Prospec-
ive testing of the proposed molecules using these methods is generally
are [52] and many prefer to skip the synthesis and find compounds that
re structurally similar but commercially available from vendors. When
uch generative machine learning model derived molecules are even-
ually synthesized this is usually not done in an automated or tightly
ntegrated fashion but handed over to a contract research organization,
ollaborator or perhaps left for other researchers to follow up. The appli-
ation of generative approaches for de novo design of larger molecules is
lso relatively unexplored (although other approaches have been devel-
ped for macrolide library enumeration [53] ) and yet there are certainly
any large biotech companies focused on biologics whose patents will
ventually expire too. One would assume that such companies are also
xploring how such machine learning methods could help them design
ew biologics or optimize their current products [54] . As a test case ex-
mple for this perspective, we have used a generative long short-term
emory (LSTM) algorithm to generate novel peptides with predicted
lucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) agonist activity ( Fig. 2 ) using publicly
vailable data for the machine learning model. This illustrated that the
e novo proposed molecules from the algorithm are in very close struc-
ural and predicted bioactivity proximity to known commercial GLP-1
gonists, which would provide some confidence of their utility. Clearly,
he ultimate proof of this will require synthesis and testing of these pro-
osed molecules, but this is just one such additional area of use for gen-
rative models and there are many therapeutic modalities where they
ould help us explore chemical and property space. This is scalable such
hat computationally one could generate many such examples for differ-
nt targets, diseases, structural scaffolds or molecular entities and then
rioritize the targets or diseases to pursue. 
Generative approaches are certainly not the only way to produce or
ptimize molecules and there is a long history of technologies (fragment-
ased drug discovery [55] , structure-based design, computer-aided de-
ign etc.). Other technologies such as DNA encoded libraries can rapidly
enerate billions of potential structures which may need to be scored by
achine learning models [56] . A bottleneck for scoring such libraries (or
assive numbers of virtual molecules in general) may be in the genera-
ion of fingerprints (such as ECFP6) and their storage before processing.
ne solution is to use the structure encoded as SMILES (or other struc-
ural representations such as SELFIES [57] ) as the input for modeling
sing an end-to-end convolution-LSTM model [58] . These types of ma-
hine learning algorithms are likely comparable to several others when
heir statistics are compared, suggesting again that there may be several
ifferent machine learning algorithms that can be applied (Table S3).
sing convolution-LSTM models for predictions for a billion molecules
n a DNA-encoded library, such that calculations take place on the GPU
llowing parallel model prediction and pre-processing, produces an ap-
roximate 50-fold speed up on prediction generation over models built
ith ECFP6 fingerprints alone on our in house 10 GPU servers. While
his is rather limited example, these types of end-to end machine learn-
ng models using SMILES have also been demonstrated in recent com-
arisons with ECFP6 for prediction of UV–Vis spectra [31] and may be
tilized for other types of datasets as well. 
F. Urbina and S. Ekins Artificial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 2 (2022) 100031 
Fig. 2. A case study of generative peptide design for GLP-1. A. An RNN-LSTM was trained on a dataset of 1554 antimicrobial peptides and generated peptides were 
scored with a GLP-1 agonist model generated from data in ChEMBL. B. dimensionality reduction using a t-SNE plot and nearest neighbor distance of generated 
proposed GLP-1 agonists. C. visualizing de novo generated GLP-1 agonists alongside commercial GLP-1 drugs to illustrate they are close in chemical property space. 
As has happened previously, we can see a time when the machine
earning algorithms we take for granted now (such as: deep learning,
raph-based methods, LSTM, transformers etc.) will be more widely
nown and used. We envisage we will also see such models integrated
nto future generations of laboratory equipment. This will enable such
ardware and software combinations to aid in molecule design whilst
lso proposing and making the molecules based on the computational
redictions [1–6] . This would also facilitate tightly integrated “design-
ake-test ” cycles to be repeated until a desired end point was reached
such as a measurable bioactivity, a molecular property, or multiple ac-
ivities or properties are met). Certainly, the need to integrate these
echnologies will require working with cheminformatics software and
ardware standards to help this come to fruition. These developments
hen combined may suggest that we are not too far away from the com-
lete design, synthesis and testing in real time guided by AI (if we are
ot there already by the time this is published!). In the past the larger
harmaceutical companies applied machine learning within relatively
mall groups and hence it had little impact. In contrast, smaller, newer,
harmaceutical companies are applying machine learning across their
ompanies and are focused on the testing of new molecules as we have
ighlighted with public or private data (Supplemental references) which
s already showing an impact based on the valuation of such compa-
ies and deals (Table S1). Machine learning has been broadly applied
o tackle hit discovery, lead optimization or beyond ( Table 1 and S2).
erhaps the biggest impact of such a technology will be on overall pro-
uctivity to those industries like animal health or agrochemicals which
re facing patent cliffs and have lost their historic connection to phar-
aceutical companies as their engine of molecule design and are now
equiring new molecules. It has also been widely noted that only a small
raction (a few hundred) of the ∼7000 rare diseases have treatments or
re even undergoing research [11] . While there are very few applica-
ions of AI technologies to rare diseases this could change this dynamic,
nabling companies to work on the research and discovery of treatments
here there is limited funding, the population may be seen as too small,
r there is little return on investment. Similarly, tropical neglected dis-
ases could also benefit, especially as there is growing quantity of in
itro data for these diseases after decades of research, thus providing a
aluable starting point for machine learning to aid future drug discovery
fforts [ 59 , 60 ] ( Table 1 and Table S2). 
Thinking about the bigger picture, machine learning may also be a
eans to an end, and that end is the molecule that has a desired ac-
ivity which is ultimately patented to create intellectual property that a
ompany then monetizes. Machine learning models applied to the con-
inuum of drug discovery could be readily used to develop a pipeline
f small or large molecules for future licensing or to serve as a start-
ng point for venture capital investors to found new companies. If mul-
iple companies take a similar approach, then it could create a mar-
et around AI-designed molecule assets for their industry segment. At
he same time, such AI-based molecule design companies could offer
his expertise and capabilities to others to create a new service industry
contract AI organization). This sharing of expertise and cross fertiliza-
ion of data and technologies across molecule-related industries may be
nevitable, blurring the boundaries between chemical industries. Such
ompanies can ultimately improve the design and selection of molecules
hat avoid likely predictable failures associated with undesirable toxicity
hich is also an area that crosses industries (e.g human, animal health,
grochemical and consumer products) and which is already possible us-
ng the knowledge captured by AI. As a perhaps over-used example, the
ommercial interest and investment in kinase inhibitors is at an all-time
igh (US$66.7Bn by the year 2025) but the companies in this area are
et to capitalize on the many afore-mentioned AI technologies like gen-
rative de novo approaches to developing compounds that target specific
inases or multiple kinases and avoid others. To date, only a few kinases
ave been used as examples for generative approaches [52] ( Table 1 )
ut they could be used for the hundreds of kinases to identify the most
hemically tractable, that would never be possible experimentally. We6 ave yet, to see kinase focused companies using such AI approaches,
nstead they rely on tried and tested structure-based design and medic-
nal chemistry. Perhaps we will see them shift to AI approaches as their
enefits continue to be described. 
onclusion 
In summary, we have highlighted several examples that illustrate
ow AI applied to molecule design may impact several related indus-
ries involved in molecule design including the pharmaceutical industry
nd others. The increased visibility and awareness of the potential of AI
s applied to drug discovery for COVID-19 [61] has been one of the few
ood things to have come out of the pandemic, even if it has delivered
ew notable successes to date ( Table 1 ). What will be interesting to see
s whether AI technology does indeed increase the long-term productiv-
ty and success of the new pharmaceutical companies that are attracting
o much recent interest. We are cautiously optimistic that the time for
I in the pharmaceutical industry is here and that it will have a lasting
mpact. While we do not have all the answers to the questions raised in
his perspective, our goal was to illustrate a recent observation that we
re currently treating these AI technologies like a commodity. There are
learly still significant challenges and opportunities to applying them,
eaving plenty of scope for future research and reviews. There are also
thical issues that have not been addressed, as these generative machine
earning technologies are so readily accessible that they could be eas-
ly misused without the need for too much underlying knowledge. We
ook forward to discussing these and other topics with the community
f scientists that are involved in this field. 
unding 
This work was supported by NIH funding: R44GM122196-02A1 and
R41GM131433-01A1 from NIGMS, 3R43AT010585-01S1 from NC-
AM and 1R43ES031038-01 from NIEHS (PI – Sean Ekins). “Research
eported in this publication was supported by the National Institute of
nvironmental Health Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under
ward Number R43ES031038. The content is solely the responsibility
f the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of
he National Institutes of Health. ”
eclaration of Competing Interest 
S.E. is owner, and F.U. is an employee of Collaborations Pharmaceu-
icals, Inc. 
cknowledgments 
Dr. Thomas R. Lane, Ana C. Puhl and Maggie A.Z. Hupcey are grate-
ully acknowledged for their many contributions and discussions. 
upplementary materials 
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in
he online version, at doi: 10.1016/j.ailsci.2022.100031.