Biotechnology has developed rapidly, especially at the end of the
0th century. In the early year of 1944, Avery et al. proved DNA as a car-
ier of genetic information. In 1953, Watson and Crick proposed a DNA
ouble helix structure model, which clarified the half-reserved replica-
ion mode of DNA and thus opened a new era of molecular biology re-
earch. In the following 1970s, the establishment of DNA recombination
echnology revolutionized the modern biotechnology and since then, all
ife activities have been demonstrated to be the result of functional bio-
ogical macromolecules including enzymes and non-enzymatic proteins.
iotechnology has shown broad application prospects and brought hope
o solve a series of problems that human beings are facing, such as dis-
ase prevention, food shortage, population expansion, environmental
ollution, and energy shortage, thereby attracting the attention of all
ountries in the world. 
In the early decade of the new millennium, the total number of re-
orts on life sciences, biotechnology and related fields accounted for
ore than 50% of the global natural science publications. With the com-
letion of genome sequencing on more and more biological samples,
uman understanding of the living world has undergone a qualitative
hange. Moreover, scientists have turned their focus from the function
f individual genes to the delicately regulated gene networks, while a
etter knowledge of all these will inevitably bring humans closer to the
oal of manipulating the whole organism. 
At present, the world is facing "great changes unseen in a century."
rom the perspective of science and technology, it is ushering in a his-
oric intersection of a new round of scientific and technological rev-
lutions. As one of the fastest-growing cutting-edge technology fields
n the 21st century, biotechnology has become an important engine
or this technological revolution. The development and transformation
f biotechnology will not only bring huge benefits to human society
hrough subversively changing the fields of scientific research, public
ealth, agriculture, energy and environmental protection, but also af-
ect the global technological, political, and economic structure, and even
rofoundly the development process of human mankind. As such, oppor-
unities and challenges coexist along with the development of biotech-
ology. 
The theme of this special issue of Fundamental Research is the Ad-
anced Biotechnologies. This special issue collects five original research
rticles and one perspective. The topics cover RNA methylation, RNA
robing, phase separation, live cell imaging, personalized vaccines and∗ Corresponding authors.