Highly monodisperse nanostructures are becoming the centre of focus in the field of material science towards the 
application of sensors, photocatalysis, gas sensing, antibacterial activity, drug delivery and energy applications. 
Monodisperse resembles uniform nanostructures towards better device performances and applications. In order 
to minimize the reaction time and characterization costs, an attempt has been made for development of a pre-
diction model for the synthesis of monodisperse silica nanospheres using Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System 
(ANFIS) software. Experimental parameters of the Stober method such as precursor’s ratio (ethanol, water and 
ammonia), Tetraethyl Orthosilicate (TEOS) and sphere size were predicted in the model. The results from the 
prediction model were used for carrying out experimentation on thin films using vertical deposition technique. 
The prepared substrates were characterized by FE-SEM & XRD analysis. Obtained Experimental results shows 
that nanosphere with a size range of 200- 250 nm will form monodisperse layer. XRD analysis confirms the 
amorphous nature of SiO2 film. ANFIS has predicted best suitable size of silica nanospheres and optimized 
precursor’s ratios for attaining highly monodisperse structure. The optimized parameters predicted from the 
ANFIS network matches well with the experimental results.   
1. Introduction 
Silica nanostructured have been widely used for drug applications, 
biosensors, bioimaging, Surface Enhanced Raman spectroscopy, gas 
sensing and acts as template for lithography techniques [1–3]. There is 
huge demand for low-cost material for advance applications. The 
different nanostructures of silica are rods, cubes, spheres, wires and 
pillars. Among the all-spherical particles have been widely used for 
above applications. Nanosphere has high surface energy because of its 
surface tension. Nanosphere have small particle size; thus, they are 
suitable to be administered orally, locally and systematically [4]. Silica 
Nanospheres have been synthesised using techniques such as sol gel, 
Coprecipitation, hydrothermal synthesis, Solvothermal method, lithog-
raphy, chemical reduction and physical deposition techniques. Among 
these all, Stöber [5,6] method has been widely used by most of the 
researcher for obtaining desired spherical size by easiest way at low cost. 
Stöber method is the extension of sol gel method, where the particles 
undergo hydrolysis and condensation process. The particle size strongly 
depends on the water and ammonia concentration, but also on the na-
ture of the alcohol used as a solvent. While using alcohols of higher 
molecular weight, the reaction is slowed down and both median particle 
size and the spread of the size distribution increased simultaneously. The 
increase in the size confirms that concentration of these parameters 
(TEOS, ethanol, ammonia, water) plays an effective role in Stöber re-
action and is so complex that each of single parameters directly brings 
changes in resultant nanoparticles size. After synthesis, it is necessary to 
bring synthesized silica in working field to use it for different applica-
tions and which is only possible if it get deposited onto substrates in wet 
form. Deposition of silica nanospheres on substrates is carried out by 
methods such as self-assembly, atomic layer method, spin coating, 
anisotropic etching, among above spin coating and vertical deposition 
techniques are simplest and low cost [7]. The deposition process carried 
out by vertical deposition method helps to get uniform monodispersed 
structure. In vertical deposition techniques the most important param-
eters are precursor ration and withdrawing time [8]. Using vertical 
deposition method SiO2 nanospheres were deposited on to glass slides 
for different dipping time. In the present work we have made an attempt 
for minimizing experimental work using theoretical approach of Adap-
tive Neuro Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS). ANFIS is one of the pre-
diction network models which connects the experimental input/output 
* Corresponding author: 
E-mail address: dhanpal@klu.ac.in (N.D. Jayram).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Chemical Physics Impact 
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/chemical-physics-impact 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chphi.2021.100042 
Received 13 October 2020; Received in revised form 29 July 2021; Accepted 18 September 2021   
Chemical Physics Impact 4 (2022) 100042
2
and transforms it into a mathematical model for further prediction of 
results [8]. 
The main objectives of this work is to 1) Creation of a robust pre-
diction model with Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) to 
optimize the particle size of silica nanospheres to form monodisperse 
thin film. 2) Examine the effect of different parameters (TEOS, ethanol, 
ammonia, water) on particle size of silica nanospheres 3) The predicted 
precursor ratio were chosen for further experimental validation and it 
was concluded that 200nm size is the best one for monodisperse coating. 
The present work will help researchers to fabricate monodispersed 
nanospheres for various applications. As theoretical simulation well 
matches with experimental work, the experimental data could be used 
for device fabrication for various application such as bio sensor, gas 
sensing and many more. Since there are multiple deposition methods 
and available nano-structures for various applications, it becomes 
tedious for the researchers to identify the best selection from the mul-
tiple combinations of parameters. 
This could save researchers time and avoid laborious calculation and 
analysis work. The suggested parameters from the present work will 
save money and helps them to avoid repetitive characterization of 
samples. 
2. Simulation and Theoretical Predication 
For optimization of parameters and to maintain the reaction at low 
cost we need to run simulation. Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and 
Fuzzy Logic (FL) are the most common of soft computing methods due to 
their acceptable accuracy within the simulation. In the present work, we 
have optimized the condition for synthesis of nanospheres using Adap-
tive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) [9]. The system is designed 
as INPUT, OUTPUT and CPU. Synthesis of nanospheres requires total 
five parameters such as TEOS, Ethanol, water and ammonia. 
2.1. Adaptive Neuro-Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) 
These parameters were taken as input data and shown in yellow 
colour. The input data are fed and output results are confirmed as F(u). 
The white color box indicates that the ANFIS software which works like 
a CPU. To run the programmes, the following datas were taken from 
literature survey and experimental work. In the below attached table the 
following data’s are represented as stöber datas. As this whole process 
needs iteration and minimum fixed parameters, the condition followed 
as for iterations process. 
2.2. Input Data for Size of Silica Nanospheres 
The membership function plots the range of the size from minimum 
to maximum value as shown in Fig. 1 Red color shows low input value, 
here the value fixed as 45nm. 
2.3. Input Data for TEOS 
Fig. 2 shows the input data for TEOS. The data is ranging from 
0.18ml to 18ml. 
2.4. Input Data for Ammonia 
The third input data is Ammonia. Ammonia acts as catalyst and plays 
vital role for synthesis of spheres. The membership function plots the 
range of the size ranges from 1.2 ml to 100 ml. in Fig. 3 
2.5. Input Data for Water 
The fourth input data is water. From the Stöber method literature 
survey the size ranges from 1.2 ml to 53.6 ml in Fig. 4 
2.6. Input Data for Ethanol 
The fifth input data is ethanol. From the Stöber method literature 
survey here the size ranges from 0.14 ml to 124 ml. 
After fed input data, ANFIS software is running. The first hydration 
process is in training error which minimizing the error of input values as 
shown in Fig. 6 
From the above five input parameters from maximum to minimum                                                                              
Chemical Physics Impact 4 (2022) 100042
3
values. The following output datas correlated with the experimental 
work. While changing the size of the sphere, TEOS, ammonia, water and 
ethanol the output results value from 1 to 5. Here 1 to 5 indicates the 
results as following: 1 is very bad, 2 as fair, 3 as average, 4 as good and 5 
as very good. 
2.7. Output data for Input size 300nm, TEOS 0.76ml, ammonia 4ml, 
Ethanol 50ml and water 10ml respectively 
The output result is 3.49 which indicates good results for the cor-
responding input values. The output datas for 60, 100, 200 and 250 nm 
sizes were found as 1.54, 2.95, 3.29, 3.32 [See supplementary datas Fig 
S1& S2] Based on the results we have taken 200nm size as the ideal case 
for the experimental work and further we have run the simulation to find 
out the optimized precursor ratio values. 
2.8. Output data for Input size 200nm, TEOS 0.2ml, ammonia 0.5ml, 
Ethanol 10 ml and water 10ml respectively 
The output results are 3.77 [Fig S3 supplementary] and 3.86 in-
dicates good results for corresponding input values. As per the above 
simulation the obtained results shows that precursors are directly pro-
portional to the output results. As the value decreases the output 
increases. 
Fig. 2. Input Data of Size
Fig. 3. Input data of TEOS  
Fig. 4. Input Data of Ammonia
Fig. 5. Input data of water
2.9. Output data for the 200nm size the values changed to TEOS 0.5ml, 
ammonia 0.5ml, Ethanol 3ml and water 3ml respectively 
The outputs results are 4.02 [Fig S4 supplementary], 4.13 indicate 
good results for corresponding input values. Here the out results are 
appearing very good as the results are 4.13 the best outcome for all the 
run profiles. 
2.10. Output data for Input size 300nm, TEOS 0.5 ml ammonia 0.5 ml, 
Ethanol 3ml and water 3 ml respectively 
The outputs results are 3.41, 3.77, 3.35, 3.08 indicate good results 
for corresponding input values. Supplementary Fig S5, and S6 shows 
that when we change the ratio of TEOS 0.5 ammonia 0.5 ml, Ethanol 3ml 
and water 3 ml for the size of silica nanospheres 100nm the output will 
be 3.35 similarly when we can the ratio of TEOS 0.76, 0.28ml ammonia 
4,0.37 ml, Ethanol 5, 12 ml and water 10,14 ml respectively the size of 
silica will be 250 to 280 nm sizes with a output of 3.77. 
3. Materials and Methods – Experimental Analysis 
3.1. Materials 
Ethanol, Ammonia, Tetra Ethyl Ortho Silicate (TEOS) all were pur-
chased from SD fine and glass substrates from the local brands. 
3.2. Synthesis of SiO2 Nanostructure Thin Films 
SiO2 monodispersed nanospheres were synthesized using the stöber 
method. Silica sol was prepared using tetraethoxyorthosilicate, ethanol, 
ammonia and de- ionized water. As shown in Fig. 12, 50 ml of ethanol 
and 10 ml of de -ionized water were mixed and stirred for 10 min in a 
250 ml jar. After this, 0.05 ml of TEOS was added to the solution. After 
20 min, ammonia was added and the reaction mixture was stirred 
continuously for an hour. A white colour appears, confirming the for-
mation of silica nanospheres. 
The vertical colloidal deposition method is used to synthesize 
nanoparticle thin films on substrates positioned vertically, relative to the 
Fig. 6. Input data of ethanol  
Fig. 7. Training Error  
solution surface. As shown schematically in Fig. 13, a microscopic slide 
was dipped vertically into the solution for different periods of time. After 
removing from the solution, the slides are dried naturally keeping in 
vertical position. When the solution evaporates, more substrate is 
exposed and is coated by the nanoparticle film. The nanoparticles pre-
sent in the suspension, within the solid-liquid-gas interface, are depos-
ited on the substrate subject to interfacial forces. 
3.3. Characterization 
Analysis of samples for X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns was 
observed on a Panalytical. X’Pert Pro with Cu Kα radiation (1.5406 Å). 
Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) studies were 
performed on a FEI Quanta 200 FEG SEM.Scanning Electron Microscope 
EVO18 (CARL ZEISS) were used for imaging deposited silica nano-
spheres. For optimization of parameters and to maintain the reaction at 
low-cost Adaptive Neuro- Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) software is 
used. 
4. Result and Discussion 
4.1. XRD analysis 
Fig. 14 shows the X-ray powder diffraction pattern of the prepared 
SiO2 film. An amorphous peak with the equivalent Bragg angle at 
2θ = 21.8◦ was recorded. The XRD pattern for the SiO2 film has no 
characteristic peak indicating the amorphous nature of the deposited 
film. 
Fig. 9. Output results of ANFIS model  
Fig. 8. ANFIS Model Structure 
Fig. 11. Output results of ANFIS model  
Fig. 10. Output results of ANFIS model  
4.2. Morphological analysis 
Effects of the precursor ratio and monodispersed: Different pre-
cursor ratios were tried before withdrawing the slides from the solution. 
While changing the ammonia ratio from 4ml to 8ml and TEOS from 0.76 
to 1 ul and keeping other aspects same, we found huge variation in 
formation of silica spheres. Concentration of ammonia did not allow 
colloidal particles to form a dense monolayer because of kinetic re-
strictions, and the silica nanospheres were deposited discretely (Fig. 15 
(a)). Concentration of TEOS results in the formation of a multilayer 
structure (Fig. 15 (b)). Typically, the concentration ratio of 1: 8ml, the 
larger the number of layers of the multilayer structure formed. A lower 
ammonia concentration and TEOS of 0.76 Fig. 15 (c)) leads to multi- 
layered formation of silica nanospheres with small spheres coming out 
of the boundary resulting in a packed stack of nanospheres bundle [7]. 
The surface morphology of synthesized silica nanospheres were 
characterized using Scanning Electron Microscope. Fig. 15 (d- e) shows 
the morphology of as deposited silica nanospheres thin films using 
vertical deposition technique. 
On the whole, close-packed monolayer arrays are observed, though 
spherical stackings and local blanks appear in certain areas, owing to the 
relative inhomogeneous size distribution of the prepared SiO2 nano-
spheres. Defects in the monolayer could arise not only because of im-
purities in colloids, but also because of the presence of by-products or 
defective particles. As a rule, small or even missed particles can cause 
only point defects called ‘mismatches,’ whereas large or twinned par-
ticles cause large-scale ‘cracks’ (Fig. 15). In the present work a single 
monolayer array (Fig. 16) is obtained with ammonia ratio of 4ml, TEOS 
0.76 and Water 10 ml and ethanol 50ml. The formation of defects 
(nanogaps), helps in the applications such as Surface Enhanced Raman 
spectroscopy [7]. The defects are the sources for the formation of 
nanogaps, which in turn act as hot spots while coating silver over the 
SiO2 layer. The red mark indicates the hexagonal ring like formation 
throughout the substrate with some gaps, which would further help the 
silver nanoparticle to fit inside the gaps. 
A theoretical result around value 3.29, 3.77, 4.02 and experimental 
Fig. 12. Output results of ANFIS model  
Fig. 13. Schematic diagram for (a) SiO2 solution preparation (b) vertical 
deposition technique Fig. 14. X-Ray Diffraction Pattern Silica Nanospheres  
results value 3.29 for the precursor ratio 0.76, 4, 10, and 50ml for 200 
nm well matches. 
5. Conclusion 
Silica nanospheres have been widely used as a base material for 
many applications such as drug delivery, bio- sensors, cosmetics, bat-
teries, anti-bacterial agent and etc. Compared to random structure, 
uniform structures have better conductivity, thermal, mechanical and 
optical properties. From literature survey, the Stöber method found to 
be the easiest and low-cost method to prepare silica nanospheres. Uni-
form size could be achieved only if the number of precursors such as 
ammonia, water, ethanol and TEOS taken in proper ratio. An attempt 
has been made to prepare monodisperse silica nanospheres using Stöber 
method on thin film using vertical deposition technique. XRD results 
show amorphous nature of SiO2 nanospheres. The SEM results show 
monolayers of silica having gaps and cracks. While magnification at 
higher scale the silica nanospheres shows that the individual nanometer 
size is around 100 nm, for further optimization of parameters, Adaptive 
Neuro- Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) method is used as simulation 
tool for prediction of sizes. Based on the literature survey data and 
experimental values results ANFIS simulation has taken 234 rules and 
output results were analysed from 1 to 5 values. The theoretical result 
well matches with our experimental results. The results showed that 
minimum value of TEOS, water and ammonia will result in good 
uniformity. 
Acknowledgments 
Corresponding author N.D. Jayram wants to acknowledge SERB FILE 
NO.SRG/2019/001576 for providing Funding. 
On behalf of all authors, the corresponding author states that there is 
no conflict of interest.
Fig. 15. FE-SEM images of silica nanospheres formed at Ammonia (a) 7ml TEOS 1ul (b) 5ml TEOS 1ul (c) 4ml and 0.76ul SEM images of (d) Silica nanospheres (e) 
silica nanosphere of different sizes. 
Fig. 16. FESEM micrographs of Monolayer array of SiO2 nanospheres.