Background: Modern day’s society is engaged in commitment-based and time-bound jobs. This invites 
tension and mental depression among many people who are not able to cope up with this type of work-
ing environment. Cases of mental depression are increasing day by day all over the world. Recently, the 
onset of the COVID-19 pandemic has added further fuel to the fire. In many countries, the ratio between 
patients with mental depression and psychiatrists or psychologists is remarkably poor. Under such a sit-
uation, the design, and development of an expert system by exploiting the hidden power of various deep 
learning (DL) and machine learning (ML) techniques can solve the problem up to a greater extent.
Methodology: Each deep learning and machine learning technique has got its advantages and disadvan-
tages to handle different classification problems. In this article four neural network-based deep learning 
architectures namely MLP, CNN, RNN, RNN with LSTM, and two Supervised Machine Learning Techniques 
such as SVM and LR are implemented to investigate and compare their suitability to track the mental 
depression from EEG Data.
Result: Among Neural Network-Based Deep Learning techniques RNN model has achieved the highest 
accuracy with 97.50% in Training Set and 96.50% in the Testing set respectively. It has been followed 
with RNN with LSTM model when there were 40% data in the Testing Set. Whereas both the Supervised 
Machine Learning Models namely SVM and LR have outperformed with 100.00% accuracies in Training 
Phase and approximately 97.25% accuracies in Testing Phase respectively.
Conclusion: This investigation and comparison-oriented study establish the suitability of RNN, RNN with 
LSTM, SVM and LR model to track mental depression from EEG data. This type of comparative research 
using Machine Learning and Deep learning architectures must be framed out on this topic to finalize the 
design and development of an expert system for the automatic detection of depression from EEG data.
In modern society, many people must take the challenges to 
fulfil the objective of their jobs in the stipulated time. As a result, 
cases of mental depression are rising rapidly all over the globe [1]. 
In many developed and developing countries, a very large pop-
ulation is experiencing deterioration in mental health conditions 
[2]. The onset of the COVID-19 Pandemic has added further fuel 
to the fire [3]. Subsequently, the ratio between the mental pa-
tients and the psychiatrist or psychologist has gone down further. 
Keeping this crisis in mind, scientists, and researchers from all 
over the world have engaged themselves in finding alternative and 
automatic techniques to track mental depression, especially from 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: aviksarkar43@gmail.com (A. Sarkar).https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuri.2022.100039
2772-5286/© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open acc
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).EEG data. Different machine learning and deep learning techniques 
along with different feature selection methods are getting popular-
ity in this domain.
Wajid Mumtaz and Abdul Qayyum suggested that for auto-
matic detection of unipolar depression, the application of one-
dimensional CNN and long and short-term memory (LSTM) can 
yield an accuracy of 98.32% and 95.97% respectively [4]. Hanshu 
Cai et al. have implemented 4 basic deep and machine learning 
techniques (KNN, SVM, CT, and ANN, with 10-fold cross-validation) 
and claimed that KNN performed best in all datasets with an ac-
curacy of 79.27% [5]. Ayan Seal et al. executed two experiments 
namely the record-wise split and the subject-wise split and used 
a DL-based convolutional neural network to track depression using 
EEG data. They reported a recognition rate of 99.37% and 91.4% re-
spectively [6]. Jing Zhu et al. applied the content-based ensemble 
method (CBEM) on two different datasets and finally achieved ac-ess article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
A. Sarkar, A. Singh and R. Chakraborty Neuroscience Informatics 2 (2022) 100039curacies of 82.5% and 92.65% respectively [7]. Xiao-Wei Wang, et 
al. adapted different feature selection methods such as wavelet, 
power spectrum, nonlinear dynamical analysis and fed the ex-
tracted features as the input to the SVM classifier. They observed 
that an accuracy rate as high as 91.77% can be achieved using Lin-
ear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) [8]. Xiaowei Li et al. proposed an 
innovative approach to track depression from EEG data. Original 
features were converted into new features by applying the deep 
forest method and used as input to the SVM classifier. They con-
verted the features into image form by introducing special infor-
mation of EEG caps to both original and converted features. Finally, 
the data in image form has been introduced as an input to the 
CNN classifier. The best recognition rate thus obtained on the en-
semble model and power spectral density is 89.02%. CNN is one 
of the prominent models of deep learning exhibited an accuracy 
of 84.75% [9]. Natasha P. et al. introduced two different methods 
of feature extraction namely Discrete Cosine Transformation and 
Discrete Wave Transformation. Extracted features were treated as 
input to implement SVM, LDA, KNN, ANN, Naïve Bayes classifier 
to detect mental stress from EEG data in a better way [10]. Linear 
features, non-linear features, and power spectral features, etc. were 
extricated by Ran Bai, et al. to implement six different machine 
learning techniques such as SVM, KNN, decision tree, Naïve Bayes, 
random forest, and Logistic Regression. Their outcome showed a 
higher rate of recall than accuracy [11]. An amalgamated model 
constructed from CNN and LSTM was used by Betul Ay et al. to 
obtain better accuracy to track depression from EEG data [12]. El-
ham S. Salama et al. reported that the 3D CNN model can serve 
as one of the suitable methods to track emotion from EEG data 
[13]. A Neural Network-based architecture was implemented by 
Sana Yasina et al. for the identification of two different types of 
mental disease from EEG data namely Major Depressive disorder 
and bipolar disorder. They formulated a review-type research pa-
per by introducing an elaborated discussion on different types of 
EEG-based protocols, biomarkers, and public datasets for efficient 
capturing of mental problems. Lastly, some know-how to increase 
the reliability and performance of proposed methods had been ex-
plained in detail [14].
In this article, we have undertaken a comparative study not 
only to investigate the suitability of different deep learning tech-
niques namely MLP, CNN (MLP has been used as a classifier, but for 
the sake of brevity only the term CNN will be used throughout the 
article), RNN, RNN with LSTM, and supervised machine learning al-
gorithms such as SVM and logistic regression to track the mental 
depression from EEG data but also wish to convey an important 
message to the world scientists to accelerate and finalize the de-
sign and development of expert system (by encouraging more and 
more this type of comparative studies in this domain which is hav-
ing societal benefits) that will detect the mental depression of a 
large population of patients within small span of time. Section 2
will deal with the description of the EEG data set used to un-
dertake this study. A brief discussion on basic methodologies of 
deep and machine learning will be presented in section 3. Re-
sults obtained from the implementation of different classifiers (to 
undertake an investigation and comparisons) will be presented in 
section 4. Conclusion and application emerged out from this com-
parative study will be highlighted in section 5. Conflict of interest 
is mentioned before Acknowledgments section. Acknowledgments 
section will acknowledge the assistance so far obtained to carry on 
this research work. Relevant references consulted during the liter-
ature survey of this work will be depicted in References section.
2. Data description
In this research work, we have used the data set named emo-
tions.csv available on the Kaggle website: [21]. This 48.83 MB data 2
contains 2132 rows and 2549 columns. The first 2548 columns 
contain independent attributes such as mean, standard deviation, 
Fast Fourier transformation, min and max values, Eigenvalues, en-
tropy, etc. extracted from the EEG brainwave data. The last column 
represents the dependent attribute named label contains three 
classes namely positive, negative, and neutral. There are 716 neu-
tral values whereas positive and negative classes each contain 708 
values.
3. Methodologies
This section will discuss the six different ML and DL method-
ologies namely MLP, CNN, RNN, RNN with LSTM, SVM, and LR 
which are being used successfully as classifiers to solve many real-
life problems. A brief discussion on these basic ML and DL method-
ologies is as follows:
MLP: A multilayer perceptron (MLP) belongs to a class of a feed 
forward Artificial Neural Network (ANN). A basic MLP architecture 
is composed of at least three basic layers. 1. the input layer 2. a 
hidden layer and 3. an output layer. In this architecture, each node 
uses a non-linear activation function excepting the nodes in the 
input layer. The data or the inputs are fed to the input layer. The 
neurons in the input layer propagate the weighted inputs and a 
randomly selected bias through the hidden layers. Afterwards, a 
net sum of hidden nodes is estimated to obtain an output response 
by using a transfer function. In the training phase, the MLP adopts 
a supervised learning technique termed as back propagation. The 
multiple layers along with non-linear activation function differen-
tiate the MLP from linear perceptron. As a result, it can handle a 
data which is not linearly separable [15][17].
CNN: The CNN or ConvNets architecture consists of two main 
parts feature extraction part and the classification part. Feature 
extraction is done with the help of convolution layers, and pool-
ing layers to extract relevant features. Feature map thus obtained 
that provides information about the image such as the corners and 
edges. There are several types of Pooling operations namely av-
erage pooling, max pooling, sum pooling, etc. Features extracted 
from the pooling layer are flattened and fed to the fully connected 
layer. Finally, the activation function, such as the ReLU, Softmax, 
tanH, and the Sigmoid functions are introduced. The activation 
function is chosen depending upon the specific usage [16,17].
RNN: Recurrent neural network (RNN) is most appropriate for a 
dataset that carries information represented in terms of time-series 
or it is sequential nature. This Architecture finds its application 
in Language Interpreter, Natural Language Processing (NLP), Voice 
Recognition and Image Captioning, etc. RNN can pull the informa-
tion from inputs of previous stages and assimilate their impact on 
the input of the current stage as well as on the output of the 
present stage. The output of recurrent neural networks depends 
on information carried by the elements within the sequence. The 
connection between different nodes forms a directed graph to give 
a temporal dynamic behavior. This assists to model sequential data 
which are derived from feedforward networks. It can reduce the 
complexity of increasing parameters and able to memorize each 
previous output by introducing each output as input to the next 
hidden layer. Finally, all the layers are clubbed together to form a 
single recurrent layer [17].
RNN with LSTM: LSTM is a successor of RNN. RNNs are un-
able to handle long-term dependencies. Exploding and vanishing 
of gradients are few other demerits of RNN. Thus, Long- Short-
Term-Memory (LSTM) emerged to rectify the deficiencies of RNN. 
This architecture can deal with continuous and discrete values. The 
complexity per weight update is O (1) with LSTM. Some funda-
mental applications of LSTM are namely Time series prediction, 
Voice recognition, Rhythm Learning, Song Composition, Handwrit-
ing Recognition, Human Action Recognition, etc. [18].
A. Sarkar, A. Singh and R. Chakraborty Neuroscience Informatics 2 (2022) 100039
The main objective of the SVM algorithm is to generate 
the best line also called decision boundary which can segregate n-
dimensional space into different classes so the new data point can 
be put in its appropriate class in the future. There can be multiple 
lines/decision boundaries to segregate the classes in n-dimensional 
space, but the objective is to find out the best decision boundary 
that helps to classify the data points. This best boundary is known 
as the hyperplane of SVM features. It can be applied for both linear 
classes by using single straight as well as for nonlinear data sets. 
The data points lie nearest to the hyperplane are called Support 
Vectors [19].
LR: Logistic Regression falls under the supervised machine-
learning technique which outperforms when output features are 
binary or categorical. It can also be applied successfully when the 
dependent variable contains more than two categories. It estimates 
the probabilistic values lying between ‘0’ and ‘1’ by use of a lo-
gistic function. Logistic Regression is best suited for the problem 
of classification, it exploits the concept of probability. Logistic Re-
gression generally uses Sigmoid Function. This algorithm finds its 
abrupt use in medicine, social science, etc. [20].
4. Results and discussions
We have applied four different deep learning architectures 
namely MLP, CNN, RNN, RNN with LSTM and two supervised ma-
chine learning techniques namely SVM, and LR on the same data 
set, to investigate and compare the performance of these mod-
els to track mental depression from EEG brain wave data. Python 
programming has been adopted to implement different architec-
tures. Before the implementation of architecture, appropriate codes 
are used to split the data into training and testing sets. Perfor-
mance and suitability of these models have investigated by keeping 
20%, 30%, and 40% data in the testing sets. Table 1 represent the 
training data recognition rate in percentage (%) obtained by imple-
mentation of these models with keeping 20%, 30% and 40% data 
in the testing set. Performance of these models further checked 
also on testing data set and recognition rate thus obtained are de-
picted in Table 2. It can be noticed from Table 1 that the training 
set recognition rates of MLP architecture are 83.20%, 84.28%, and 
84.77% respectively with keeping 20%, 30%, and 40% data in the 
testing set. On the other hand, corresponding training set recog-
nition rates (with 20%, 30%, and 40% data in the testing set) for 3
CNN architecture are 97.36%, 97.36%, and 97.27% respectively. Fur-
ther scrutinization of this table reveals that RNN and RNN with 
LSTM architectures are also performed well when implemented 
with 20%, 30%, and 40% data in the testing set. The corresponding 
training set recognition for these two neural networks-based deep 
learning architectures are 97.95%, 97.32%, 97.27% (for RNN) and 
97.95%, 93.13%, 96.97% (for RNN with LSTM) respectively. Finally, 
it is really, appreciable to notice that the training set recognition 
rate is 100% for both the machine learning techniques namely SVM 
and LR. It remained invariant (100%) for all three combinations of 
the percentage of data in the testing set i.e., with 20%, 30%, and 
40% data in the testing sets.
Now, the test dataset is used to provide an unbiased evaluation 
of these models fitted on the training dataset. It can be noticed 
from Table 2, the testing set recognition rates are 77.37%, 75.93%, 
and 76.43% respectively for MLP architecture. So, it can be con-
cluded that MLP architecture has shown satisfactory performance 
during its implementation (both in training and testing phases). 
CNN architecture has shown a noticeable fall in its recognition rate 
when tested on testing data sets. Here, the testing set recognition 
rates are 59.25%, 56.40%, and 49.82% respectively. Demonstrates
that CNN architecture has performed noticeably well in its training 
phase whereas underperformed in its testing phase. CNN architec-
ture is not suitable for sequential time series data.
The testing set recognition (with 20%, 30% and 40% data in the 
testing set) for RNN and RNN with LSTM architectures are 97.95%, 
96.40%, 97.65% and 87.58%, 90.13%, 97.65% respectively. Both these 
neural network-based deep learning architectures have performed 
remarkably well in their training and testing phases. It is to be 
noted that in comparison to RNN model, the RNN with LSTM ar-
chitecture (in testing phase) has experienced about 10% and 6% 
drop-in recognition rate when there were 20% and 30% data in the 
testing set respectively whereas the recognition rate (about 97%) is 
nearly equal both in the cases of RNN and RNN with LSTM model 
when there were 40% data in testing set. Finally, among neural 
networks-based deep learning architectures, the RNN model has 
been found as most suitable to track mental depression from EEG 
brain wave data. It has been followed with RNN with LSTM model 
when there were 40% data in the testing set.
The supervised machine learning architectures namely SVM and 
LR have outperformed both in training and testing phases when 
implemented to track the mental depression from EEG brain wave 
A. Sarkar, A. Singh and R. Chakraborty Neuroscience Informatics 2 (2022) 100039
Fig. 1. Performance of Different Neural Networks and Supervised Machine Learning architectures with 20% data in the Testing Set.
Fig. 2. Performance of Different Neural Networks and Supervised Machine Learning architectures with 30% data in the Testing Set.data. The relative testing recognition rate for SVM (with 20%, 30% 
and 40% data in the testing set) and LR (with 20%, 30% and 40% 
data in the testing set) are 97.65%, 97.18%, 95.89% and 97.18%, 
96.87%, 96.60% respectively. SVM and LR models are best suited 
for sequential and time-series data. Finally, it is to be concluded 
that SVM and LR architectures have been found most suitable to 
track mental depression from EEG brain wave data.
From the obtained results, Fig. 1, Fig. 2, and Fig. 3 (bar dia-
grams) are drawn further to undertake a more clear-cut compar-
ison in the performance of different Deep Learning (Neural Net-
work) and Supervised Machine Learning architectures. Fig. 1 de-
picts both training and testing recognition rates of MLP, CNN, RNN, 
RNN with LSTM, SVM, and LR with 20% of the data in the test-
ing set. Similarly, Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 reflect both training and testing 
recognition rates of MLP, CNN, RNN, RNN with LSTM, SVM, and LR 
with 30% and 40% of data in the testing set respectively. Scruti-4
nization of these figures once again establishes that among Neural 
Network-based Deep Learning architectures, the RNN model has 
been emerged out as the most suitable model to track mental de-
pression from EEG brain wave data as it has performed best both 
in training and testing phases. It has been followed with RNN with 
LSTM when there were 40% data in the testing set. Further inves-
tigation of these figures reveals that both the Supervised Machine 
learning techniques (SVM and LR) have performed exceptionally 
well in both training and testing phases finally proven their suit-
ability to track the mental depression from EEG brain wave data.
5. Conclusion and applications
Considering a leaps and bound rise in the cases of mental 
depression all over the world the authors have formulated this 
research article to capture the suitability and unsuitability of dif-
A. Sarkar, A. Singh and R. Chakraborty Neuroscience Informatics 2 (2022) 100039
Fig. 3. Performance of Different Neural Networks and Supervised Machine Learning architectures with 40% data in the Testing Set.ferent neural networks and Supervised Machine learning architec-
tures (MLP, CNN, RNN, RNN with LSTM, SVM, and LR) to detect 
mental depression from EEG brain wave data. This meaningful ap-
plication of ML and DL architectures has got tremendous societal 
benefits. It carries an important message for the researchers and 
scientists all over the world. They must encourage this type of 
comparison-based studies on a larger scale to accelerate and then 
finalize the design and development of an expert system which 
will detect the depression automatically from the EEG Brainwave 
data. By doing so a large population of the patients will be able 
to know on a preliminary basis whether they are suffering from 
mental depression or not within a very short span of time. It has 
been concluded that among neural network-based deep learning 
techniques, the RNN and RNN with LSTM (especially when there 
were 40% data in testing set) architectures have yield better results 
(both for the training and testing phases) in comparison to MLP 
and CNN architectures. This establishes the suitability of RNN and 
RNN with LSTM architectures when implemented in the case of se-
quential and time-series data and the EEG brain wave data inherit 
these properties. Results obtained by the implementation of MLP 
architecture are moderate (both in training and testing phases) in 
nature whereas CNN architecture has under-performed especially 
during the testing phase of the implementation. The CNN archi-
tecture is best suited for image data. Generally, the Supervised 
Machine learning models work well in the case of sequential, lin-
early separable, and time-series data. This characteristic has been 
reflected in the result obtained from the implementation of SVM 
and LR architectures. Both SVM and LR have outperformed (both 
in training and testing phases) when implemented to track the 
mental depression from EEG brain wave data. Finally, it can be 
concluded that RNN, RNN with LSTM (for 40% data in testing set), 
SVM, and LR can be considered as suitable architectures to track 
mental depression from EEG brain wave data. Finally, the conclu-
sion is, this type of deep-learning-based automatic depression de-
tection system may be proved extremely useful in tracking mental 
depression at various psychiatry departments, medical and diag-
nostic centres, and in different hospitals also.
Information on funding
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding 
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.5
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare they have no conflict of interest for this 
study.