Nowadays, fossil fuels still account for the dominant market of global
rimary energy consumption, causing the big concern of climate warming due to the great amount of greenhouse gas production. Low-carbon
economy and sustainable development have become the consensus for
global countries. Against this background, the European Union (EU) has
made the 2030 climate & energy framework which aims to cut emissions
with a binding target by 40% before 2030 compared to the level in 1990.
The United States has officially rejoined the Paris Agreement in 2021
and renewed the commitment for tackling the global climate issues with
plans to reduce carbon emissions by 80% before 2050 compared to the
1990’s level. For developing countries, some effective policies are also
proposed for carbon emission reduction targets. It should be pointed that
China has long-term development plans to reach peak emissions before
2030 and achieve the goal of carbon neutrality by 2060. Hence, countries all over the world unite to make their supreme efforts for achieving low-carbon society. 
The application of renewable energy, including solar, nuclear,
eothermal, and wind power, is regarded as one of the main measures
or carbon reduction. With the influence of the COVID-19 pandemic, the
emerging demand market of renewable energy grows by almost 70% in
2021 due to the impediment of conventional fuel trading and transport.
On the other hand, the high-efficiency utilization of energy resources
may also contribute to emission reduction, which plays an essential role
in the low-carbon economy. Note that the development and efficient utilization of renewable energy have become the primary issue of global
ommon concern. 
Energy storage technology is beneficial for shifting peak load, reducing the imbalance between energy supply and demand, and ensuring the
afe and stable operation of the power system. According to the form of
torage, the energy storage technologies can be classified into thermal storage as in phase change materials, electrical storage as in supercapacitors, electrochemical storage as in batteries, magnetic storage as an superconducting magnetic energy storage, kinetic storage as in fly heels, chemical storage as in hydrogen, etc. With the development of
renewable energy, energy storage technology has become a critical concern for improving energy efficiency, maintaining system stability and
nsuring energy security. 
On the other hand, energy saving is another effective way for achieving carbon reduction and developing a sustainable economy. For both conventional and renewable energy resources, measures should be implemented for obtaining high-efficiency energy utilization and conversion, such as the optimization of combustion system (e.g., vehicle tur-Peer review under responsibility of Xi’an Jiaotong University. 
The market
survey indicates that energy storage and energy saving technologies are
increasingly gaining impetus, and the level will skyrocket in the coming
several decades. 
Energy Storage and Saving (ENSS) is a forward-looking journal to meet
he needs of renewable energy and energy utilization/conversion development. We hope to establish an international platform for exchanging academic perspectives, discussing development trends and attracting important achievements and high-quality publications related to the
field of energy storage and energy saving.
Aims and scope of the journal 
ENSS is an international and interdisciplinary journal that disseminates original research articles in the field of energy storage and energy saving. The mission of ENSS is to advance research in energy storage and saving and its application in the field of thermal and chemical storage, biological system, electromagnetics, economics, etc. ENSS
welcomes original work covering theoretical, methodological, and empirical research articles, literature reviews, short communications, and
commentaries. We are particularly interested in expanding representaion on the board of the following areas of expertise but not limited to:
1) Energy storage technologies, including thermal energy storage, biological storage, chemical and electrochemistry storage, cryogenic
storage, magnetic storage, hydrogen and fuel cells, batteries, phase
change materials, etc. 
2) Energy saving technologies, including energy efficiency, smart energy and intelligent management, pollutant emission reduction, heat
exchangers, building applications, system integration, etc. 
3) Energy security and economic analysis, including life cycle assessment, economics and business models, environmental impact, sustainable development, etc. 
What this journal offers 
ENSS is an Open Access (OA) journal, which will allow authors to
have a broader impact in the field of energy storage and energy saving by sharing and spreading their new research works more precisely,
quickly, and effectively across multiple and overlapping communities.